The Project Gutenberg eBook of Mårbacka, by Selma Lagerlöf

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Mårbacka

Author: Selma Lagerlöf

Translator: Velma Swanston Howard

Release Date: December 8, 2021 [eBook #66906]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Paul Haxo from images graciously made available by Google and
             the University of Michigan.

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MÅRBACKA ***




MÅRBACKA




BOOKS BY SELMA LAGERLÖF


JERUSALEM, A Novel

(_Trans. from Swedish by Velma Swanston Howard_)


CHRIST LEGENDS

(_Trans. from Swedish by Velma Swanston Howard_)


WONDERFUL ADVENTURES OF NILS

(_Trans. from Swedish by Velma Swanston Howard_)


FURTHER ADVENTURES OF NILS

(_Trans. from Swedish by Velma Swanston Howard_)


GIRL FROM THE MARSH CROFT

(_Trans. from Swedish by Velma Swanston Howard_)


LEGEND OF THE SACRED IMAGE

(_Trans. from Swedish by Velma Swanston Howard_)


MIRACLES OF ANTICHRIST

(_Trans. from Swedish by Pauline Bancroft Flach_)


STORY OF GÖSTA BERLING

(_Trans. from Swedish by Pauline Bancroft Flach_)


THE EMPEROR OF PORTUGALLIA

(_Trans. from Swedish by Velma Swanston Howard_)


THE HOLY CITY, Jerusalem II

(_Trans. from Swedish by Velma Swanston Howard_)


INVISIBLE LINKS

(_Trans. from Swedish by Pauline Bancroft Flach_)


LILLIECRONA’S HOME

(_Trans. from Swedish by Anna Barwell_)


THE OUTCAST

(_Trans. from Swedish by W. Worster, M. A._)


MÅRBACKA

(_Trans. from Swedish by Velma Swanston Howard_)




MÅRBACKA


BY

SELMA LAGERLÖF


TRANSLATED FROM THE SWEDISH BY

VELMA SWANSTON HOWARD


GARDEN CITY NEW YORK

DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY

1925




COPYRIGHT, 1924, BY

DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES

AT

THE COUNTRY LIFE PRESS, GARDEN CITY, N.Y.




                    CONTENTS

              THE STRÖMSTAD JOURNEY

                                             PAGE

     I. The Nursemaid                           1

    II. Grand Company                          10

   III. The Drive to Karlstad                  18

    IV. In the Cabin on the _Uddeholm_         21

     V. At the Goldsmith’s Shop                26

    VI. Gray Island                            32

   VII. The Bird of Paradise 39

  VIII. The Keepsake 47


           THE OLD HOUSEKEEPER’S TALES

     I. Grandmother                            53

    II. The Ghost of Vilarstensbacken          55

   III. Pastor Wennervik                       63

    IV. The Gander                             67

     V. The Lemmings                           71

    VI. The Neckan                             80

   VII. The Paymaster of the Regiment          84

  VIII. The Militia-Men                        96


           OLD HOUSES AND OLD PEOPLE

     I. The Stone Huts                        105

    II. The Money-Chest                       112

   III. The Larder on Stilts                  120

    IV. The Manservants’ Cottage              127

     V. The _Jungfru_                         133

    VI. The Bridal-Crown                      142

   VII. _Vackerfeldt_                         155

  VIII. The Orchestra                         169


                THE NEW MÅRBACKA

     I. The Seventeen Cats                    179

    II. The New Barn                          188

   III. The Garden                            197

    IV. The Roof Trusses                      207


             WORKDAYS AND FÊTE DAYS

     I. Nooning                               215

    II. Mamselle Brorström                    219

   III. Riding to _Blåkulla_                  226

    IV. Bellman Ballads                       231

     V. Boys and Girls                        237

    VI. The Old Soldier                       244

   VII. The Land of Heart’s Desire            247

  VIII. The _Slom_ Season                     252

    IX. The Seventeenth of August             264


  Postscript                                  285




THE STRÖMSTAD JOURNEY




MÅRBACKA

I

THE NURSEMAID


ONCE they had a nursemaid at Mårbacka who was called Back-Kaisa. She
must have been all of six feet high. She had a large-featured, swarthy,
stern-looking face, her hands were hard and full of cracks, in which
the children’s hair would catch when she combed it, and she was heavy
and mournful.

A person of that sort could hardly be said to have been especially
created for the nursery, and indeed Fru Lagerlöf had deliberated a long
while before engaging her. The girl had never been out to service and
knew nothing of the ways of people; she had grown up on a poor
backwoods croft, among the wooded hills above Mårbacka, far from any
other habitation.

Probably there was no one else available, or Fru Lagerlöf would not
have had her come. That the girl did not know how to make up a bed, or
build a fire in a tile-stove, or prepare a bath, was understood
beforehand; but she was teachable and did not mind sweeping out the
nursery every day, or dusting, or washing baby-clothes. What she could
not seem to learn, however, was how to get along with the little folk.
She never played with them or gave them a pleasant word. She knew no
sagas and no songs. It was not that she meant to be unkind, but she was
so constituted that romp and frolic and laughter were hateful to her.
She would have liked the children to sit quietly, each in his or her
little chair, without moving or talking.

Fru Lagerlöf was at all events quite pleased with the nursemaid. As for
her not knowing any stories--well, the Mårbacka children had their
grandmother, who every morning as soon as she was dressed gathered the
youngsters about her, and sang and narrated for them till away up to
dinner-time. And they had someone, too, who played with them, for
Lieutenant Lagerlöf, whenever he had a spare moment, romped with his
children.

Back-Kaisa was strong, patient, and dutiful. She was a person to be
depended on. When her master and mistress went off to a party, they
could rest assured that she did not run out and leave the children
alone in the nursery. If only she’d had a more delicate touch she would
have been admirable. But hers were no gentle clutches when little arms
had to go into dress-sleeves. When she washed the children the soap
always got into their eyes; and when she wielded the comb they felt as
if every wisp of hair were being torn from their heads.

The nursery at Mårbacka was a light, warm, spacious room--the best
in the whole house. But, unhappily, it was a gable-room, and to get
there one had first to go out into the lower front hall, then up a
flight of steps and across a big attic. The attic stairs were steep,
and difficult for little feet to climb. Now the former nursemaid used
to take a child on her arm and carry it up, but Back-Kaisa didn’t seem
to know enough for that. And it was positively terrifying to walk the
length of that attic--above all, after dark! So it seemed almost
necessary that little hands should have a large hand to slip into. But
Back-Kaisa, who had been accustomed to the dark of the wild forest,
probably thought the attic at Mårbacka a nice safe place. She just
stalked on and never so much as put out a hand. One was glad if one
could even catch hold of a corner of her skirt.

The beds in which the three children slept had been made by the clever
old carpenter at Askersby, and they were quite decorative, with a
little row of spindles across each headboard; but they were in two
sections that pulled out and pushed in like a drawer. Large as the
nursery was, the three beds when open took up a lot of space; so it was
well they could be folded during the day. Now that in itself was all
right, but the clever old carpenter had somehow managed to make the
beds in such a way that they sometimes sprang apart in the dead of the
night.

When that happened, you were of course startled out of your sweetest
slumber. Finding your bed cut off in the middle, you drew yourself
into the upper end and tried to catch back sleep again. But somehow it
would not come. After a while you stretched out your legs and let them
dangle. In that position you lay waiting for the Sandman till you were
as wide awake as in broad day. Then at last you decided to get up and
try to push the two parts together. When you had apparently succeeded
and had got the bedclothes nicely straightened, you crept back into bed
as cautiously as possible, and stretched out once more with a feeling
of satisfaction. All went well, sleep came stealing on, then a careless
turn and--crickety-crash!--the bed was apart again ... which put an end
to all hope of getting any sleep that night.

But Back-Kaisa slept peacefully through it all. It did not occur to any
of the little ones that they might awaken her and ask for help. The
former nursemaid had always jumped up the instant a bed broke down, and
quickly fixed it without having to be asked.

Just over the nursery there was a little lumber-loft full of discarded
looms and spinning-wheels, and amid all that old rubbish lived an owl.

At night that owl made a dreadful racket. To the children’s ears it
sounded as if someone were rolling big, heavy logs over their heads.
The former nursemaid used to laugh at them when they were frightened by
the noise, and say there was nothing to be scared about--it was only
the owl. But Back-Kaisa, who hailed from the forest, was afraid of all
animals, furred and feathered. They were to her like evil spirits. So,
whenever she was awakened in the night by the owl she would take out
her prayer book and begin to read. Indeed she could not soothe the
children; on the contrary, she terrified them so that the poor little
owl grew into a huge monster with tiger-claws and eagle-wings. No words
can picture how they lay shuddering to the very roots of their being at
the thought of having a horrible ogre like that right above them. What
if it should tear a hole through the ceiling with its great claws, and
come swooping down...!

It can never be said of Back-Kaisa that she neglected the children, or
beat them. But was that anything much? True, the former nursemaid had
not been so particular about keeping them neat and clean; but she was
oh, so good to them!

The children had three little wooden chairs which they regarded as
their greatest treasure. These had been presented to them by the clever
old carpenter of Askersby. Whether they were meant as compensation for
his failure with the beds, they did not know, but they rather thought
so. At any rate, the chairs were not failures. They were both light and
strong, and could be used as tables and sleds. The children could ride
them all around the room, stand upon them and jump to the floor, or lay
them down and play they were a cow shed, a stable, or a rabbit hutch.
Oh, there was nothing they could not be used for!

Why the children prized those chairs so highly could be seen at a
glance by turning them upside down. On the bottom of each chair was the
portrait of its owner. On one was Johan, a boy in blue with a long
riding whip in his hand; on another posed Anna, a dainty little maid in
a red frock and yellow leghorn hat--sniffing at a nosegay; while on the
third was Selma, a tiny tot in a blue dress and striped apron, but with
nothing in her hand and nothing on her head.

Now these portraits had been painted there to show to whom the chairs
belonged, and the children regarded them as their property in quite a
different sense from wearing apparel and other things they received
from their parents. Their clothes travelled from one to another, and
their nice toys were either locked away or set up on the corner bracket
in the parlour; but the chairs, which bore their likenesses--who would
have thought of depriving them of these?

Therefore, it was awfully mean of Back-Kaisa to put all three chairs on
top of the high birch-wood bureau, as she did sometimes, so that the
children could not get at them. What if she had but just scrubbed the
nursery and the little chairs would leave ugly marks on the wet floor
if trailed across it? The former nursemaid never would have had the
heart to take the chairs away from them. No, not even for a moment.

Fru Lagerlöf saw, to be sure, that the maid did not understand her
little ones and that they were afraid of her. But Back-Kaisa had been
hired for a year, and Fru Lagerlöf could not very well send her away
before her time was up. She hoped, however, that things would be
better in the summer, when the children could play out of doors, and
have less to do with the nursemaid.

One forenoon in the early summer, it happened that the youngest child,
a little girl, had been left alone, and asleep, in the nursery. On
awaking she sat up in bed, half-dazed, and wondered where everyone had
gone; at the same time she felt singularly drowsy and uncomfortable.
She remembered, as she came to herself somewhat, that earlier in the
day she and the other children had been to Ås Springs with their father
to bathe. On their return Back-Kaisa had put all three of them to
bed--dressed as they were--that they might nap a while before dinner.
But the beds on which Johan and Anna had lain now stood empty; so the
little girl knew, of course, that they were already up and gone.

They were perhaps out in the garden playing? She felt a bit hurt at
their running off like that, leaving her all by herself in the nursery.
She had better crawl out of bed, she thought, and hurry down to them.

The little girl was then three and a half years old, and she could
easily open the door and walk down the stairs. But to cross the
dangerous attic alone ... She listened--perhaps someone was coming to
fetch her.... No, there were no footsteps on the stair; she would have
to venture by herself.

But now that she wanted to rise from her bed she could not. She tried
again and again, only to sink back. Her legs did not seem to belong
to her; she had lost all control of them.

The child was terror-stricken. The feeling of utter helplessness which
came over her when the body refused to obey was something so dreadful
she remembered it long, long afterwards--aye, all her life.

Naturally, she began to cry. She was in great trouble, and there was no
grown person at hand to help or comfort her. But she had not been alone
such a very long while when the door opened and Back-Kaisa appeared.

“Isn’t Selma coming down to dinner? The big folk----” Back-Kaisa
stopped short.

The little girl never thought about its being the cross nursemaid who
stood in the doorway. In her desperate plight she only saw a grown
person who could help her--and put out her arms to her.

“Come and take me, Back-Kaisa!” she cried. “Come and take me!”

When the nurse came up to the bedside the little girl threw her arms
about her neck and clung to her as no child had ever done before. A
little tremor went through Back-Kaisa, and her voice was not real
steady when she asked:

“What’s the matter with Selma? Is her sick?”

“I can’t walk, Back-Kaisa,” wailed the child.

Then a pair of strong arms lifted her up as easily as if she were just
a tiny kitten, and all at once the stern, serious-minded woman knew how
to talk to a little child.

“Naa--Selma mustn’t cry for that! Back-Kaisa’s going to carry Selma.”

And with that it seemed as if all the little one’s troubles had blown
away. She was no longer afraid or unhappy. What did it matter that she
herself could not walk when Back-Kaisa would carry her! And nobody had
to tell her; she knew that one who had a good strong friend like
Back-Kaisa was not so badly off after all.




II

GRAND COMPANY


JOHAN and Anna were driven nearly to distraction by the terrible
commotion created by Selma’s illness.

That one may well understand. Johan was then seven years of age, and
learning to read under the tutelage of Herr Tyberg. He was a boy, of
course, and almost regarded as the eldest child; though, to be sure, he
had an elder brother. But the latter mostly stayed with his maternal
grandparents at Filipstad, and was hardly ever at home. And now, all at
once, it seemed that nobody had a thought for him--Johan--but only for
the littlest girl.

As for Anna--she was five, and she could already both sew and crochet.
She was pretty to look at, too, and the elder daughter, and mamma’s
pet. But what was the good of all that since Selma had gone and got
sick?

The grown-ups, you see, were so touched by the sight of a child who
could not walk. “How will the poor little thing go through life?” they
would sigh.---- “She’ll have to stay in the one place always, and never
see anything of the world.”---- “She’ll never get married and she’ll
never be able to support herself.”---- “It’s going to be cruelly hard
for her, poor child.” They were all very tender and full of pity for
the sick girl. Now _that_ Johan and Anna had nothing against; but folks
didn’t have to forget that there were other children.

The worst one of all, though, was Back-Kaisa. She carried Selma on her
back, prattled with her, and told her she was a perfect little angel.
And, indeed, Father and Mother and Granny and Auntie were not much
better. Didn’t the clever old carpenter at Askersby have to make her a
little wagon, so that Back-Kaisa might draw her about? And were Johan
and Anna ever allowed to borrow that wagon to cart sand in?--No, no!
That was for Selma’s use, and they mustn’t soil it.

Johan and Anna both knew that when Selma could walk there had been
nothing remarkable about her; but now visitors couldn’t come to the
house but she must be carried in for them to see and make a fuss over.
And if a peasant woman happened to drop into the kitchen Back-Kaisa was
there in a jiffy, showing Selma to her. The exasperating thing about it
all was that Back-Kaisa was forever saying what a good child Selma
was--she never cried and never sulked, even though so helpless. And why
shouldn’t she be good, thought Johan and Anna, the way she was treated!
Carried about, and waited on, and petted, day in and day out!

Yes, Back-Kaisa was certainly very trying, Johan and Anna agreed. She
could not bear to see Fru Lagerlöf make Anna a prettier dress than the
one Selma got; and if any one happened to say of Johan, that he was a
nice polite little boy, she’d always remark: “’Twould be a shame for
one that’s able to walk, and can go where he likes, not to be good.”

That old Doctor Hedberg of Sunne was called in time and again on
Selma’s account, Johan and Anna thought no more than right; nor did
they complain when Högman’s Inga, who often came to the manor to mumble
over sick cows and pigs, was consulted. But they felt it had gone
rather far when once, in the absence of Lieutenant Lagerlöf, Back-Kaisa
and Granny and the housekeeper put their heads together, and sent for
the dangerous old witch-doctor of Högbergssäter--she who every Maundy
Thursday greased a broomstick and went riding to the Witches’ Kitchen.
They had heard that she had the power to set fire to a house by just
looking at it, and were dreadfully uneasy the whole time she was at
Mårbacka. They thought it very wrong of Back-Kaisa to bring a horrid
creature like her to the house.

Of course Johan and Anna wanted to have Selma restored to health. They
above everyone wished her well again. All the same, they didn’t think
it a bit nice of her to go and catch a sickness no one could cure. But
Back-Kaisa must have thought differently. For when neither Doctor
Hedberg, who had so often cured them of coughs and colds, nor Högman’s
Inga, who never failed with cows and pigs, nor yet the dangerous
witch-hag, who could put life into a broomstick, had been able to help
her, Back-Kaisa vowed she was growing more and more wonderful all the
time. And when Lieutenant Lagerlöf finally took her to Karlstad and
showed her to Surgeon Major Haak, who was the best doctor in the city,
and even he could do nothing for her, then Back-Kaisa was ready to
burst with pride. Now wouldn’t it have been better if Selma had taken
on a sickness that would come to an end? So at least thought Johan and
Anna.

The worst of it was that Selma was getting quite spoiled by
Back-Kaisa’s being too good to her. Little as she was, she had found
out that it was not necessary for her to be as obedient as the other
children, who could stand on their feet. Above all, she did not have to
eat food that was not to her liking. When Fru Lagerlöf set before her a
helping of stewed carrots, or spinach, or some hard-boiled eggs, or a
plate of ale-soup, she was not expected to finish her portion as in
other days; she had only to push her plate away, and immediately
Back-Kaisa ran out to the kitchen and fetched something Selma liked.

And it was not enough with that!--Johan and Anna noticed that when
Doctor Hedberg and Högman’s Inga and the old witch had all failed to
cure her, Selma thought herself too grand to eat plain fare. Why, she
barely deigned to touch fried chicken and new potatoes and wild
strawberries and cream. But when she had been to Karlstad, and the
great Doctor Haak had said he could do nothing for her, then she would
not eat anything but pastry and preserves.

Johan and Anna had heard that Aunt Nana Hammargren, who lived in
Karlstad, was dreadfully worried about Selma, and feared she would
starve to death; and they, too, felt that unless something happened
very soon to change all this, it might end badly.

But something did happen.

One morning Back-Kaisa carried the little girl into the kitchen-bedroom
and set her down among the pillows on Grandmother Lagerlöf’s big white
bed.

“Now Selma’s going to see something,” she said.

The bed was made up--sheets and all--but it had not been slept in
during the night, and apparently no one lay there now, either.
Grandmother Lagerlöf, who was not usually up at that early hour, sat
all dressed on the corner sofa; and Aunt Lovisa, who shared the
kitchen-bedroom, was also up and dressed. They both looked happy and
content, and when the little girl was well seated on the bed they arose
and went over to her.

“Aha! Grand company came last night,” her grandmother said with a
chuckle.

The little girl laughed, too, for what could be more delightful than
having visitors in the house! She looked up and down and all around,
wondering where the grand company might be. It was nowhere in the room,
surely--not in the yellow corner-cupboard, nor behind the tall
grandfather’s clock, nor under Auntie’s chiffonier. There was only one
good hiding-place--the covered passage leading to the cellar; but the
grand company could never have crawled in there.

It was all very strange! Why was she sitting on Granny’s bed, and why
were the others standing there staring, as if the grand company were in
the bed? She glanced from one to the other, quite bewildered. Presently
Aunt Lovisa bent down and moved the pillows a little. Then Selma saw
that by her side lay a small oblong bundle, to which she attached no
importance whatever. Granny had said that grand company had come, and
grand company meant only one thing--far-come visitors who brought toys
and big bags of candy for the children. That was the company she was
looking for.

“Are they in there?” she asked, pointing toward the parlour. She
listened for the sound of voices from the next room; seeing how pleased
and elated the others were, her expectations rose high.

“Why, she’s right there beside you.” Granny lifted a corner of the
oblong bundle and revealed two tiny hands and a little wizened face.

The little girl gave the swaddling a scornful glance then looked away.
She had seen such before, and did not care for them. Her thoughts were
on the company with the candy bags.

“See,” said Aunt Lovisa, “this is a little sister who came to you last
night, and you must be good to her.”

Here was something for which she was wholly unprepared. She would have
been glad to welcome another sister--one who could walk and talk; but
this swaddling did not interest her at all.

However, it was plain to her now that no grand company had come. Granny
meant only the poor little baby, and she knew very well that _it_ had
not brought any candy.

She felt so bitterly disappointed that she just had to cry. Back-Kaisa
was obliged to carry her out to the kitchen, lest her crying awaken the
grand company.

And she had cause for tears. Her day of power and supremacy was over.
Back-Kaisa had now to help Fru Lagerlöf with the care of the little
newcomer, who was even more helpless and lost, as it were, than Selma.
One couldn’t reason with the baby, so it was always she, Selma, who had
to be patient, and wait.

From that time on they were not so keen about showing her to company.
Now it was the swaddling that was brought forward to be seen and
praised. All the glamour and greatness had dropped from her; she was no
more now than Anna or Johan.

The year that followed she had many distressing experiences. She had
not only to give up living exclusively on a diet of pastry and
preserves, but things even went so far that when Fru Lagerlöf served
her boiled carrots, or spinach, or pease-pods, no one removed her plate
and brought her other fare. She had to eat what was set before her. If
Anna received a prettier dress than Selma no one protested. On the
contrary, they all thought it only fair, since Anna was the eldest
daughter.

Ah, sometimes her heart sank way down into her boots, for she was not
altogether certain that Back-Kaisa did not care just as much for the
wee one as she did for her.




III

THE DRIVE TO KARLSTAD


BACK-KAISA and her charge were on a journey. They sat perched up on the
box of the big close-carriage with Magnus, the coachman, who was so
gripped by his responsibility of driving three horses on the dreadful
road to Karlstad that not a word could be got out of him.

On the back seat of the carriage sat Fru Lagerlöf and Mamselle Lovisa,
with Johan and Anna opposite, their backs to the horses. It was much
more fun, of course, to sit on the coach-box and watch the horses than
being shut in under the tilt. Johan would have liked to be up there
with Magnus; but Fru Lagerlöf had said it was impossible to squeeze
Back-Kaisa in on the front seat, and where she rode, Selma must ride.
Lieutenant Lagerlöf was also along on the journey, but he rode alone at
some distance ahead, in his carriole.

It was a year now since the little girl first lost the use of her legs,
and in all that time she had not set foot on the ground. She was now
being taken to the West Coast in the hope that the sea air and the
baths might possibly effect a cure. She was the only invalid among
them, but a summer at the seaside would no doubt be of benefit to all.

The little girl sitting up there on the driver’s seat had quite
forgotten her affliction. She and Back-Kaisa were going away together,
and the baby had been left at home! She was looking forward to a
revival of those happy, never-to-be-forgotten times.

Snuggling close to the nurse, she put her arms about her neck and asked
her again and again if she was not glad that they two could now be
together, with no one to disturb them.

There was no reply. But the little girl did not much mind; Back-Kaisa
had never been a talking person.

The great highroad to Karlstad was just one hill after another. There
was the tortuous stretch round Bävik and Gunnarsby Hill, which was
about three and a half English miles long; then came the steep grade up
to the Sundgård mountains which was close to vertical. But most
perilous of all was Kleva towering above an abyss. It was up and down
the whole time, as if one were see-sawing between heaven and earth.
Lieutenant Lagerlöf, to make the going easier, had ordered three horses
put to the carriage--an arrangement to which neither horses nor driver
was accustomed.

If anything was calculated to increase the little girl’s delight at
having Back-Kaisa all to herself once more, it was being allowed to sit
where she could look down at the frisky horses that dashed on as if the
heavy carriage were only a toy wagon, tearing round the curves, with
the vehicle sometimes on two wheels. Often the horses would stiffen
their legs and make the downgrade almost on their haunches, and when
they came to a sudden drop in the road, Magnus would stand up and use
the whip desperately, to urge the horses on so that the high carriage
would not come tumbling over them.

In the middle of one of these break-neck descents the little girl again
turned to the nurse and said:

“Aren’t you glad, Back-Kaisa, to be alone with me? Aren’t you glad,
Back-Kaisa, the baby isn’t along?”

There came no response now, either; and wondering, the child turned so
that she could see the nurse’s face.... Back-Kaisa sat holding on to
the seat, a fixed stare in her eyes, her lips compressed, her face the
hue of ashes. “Isn’t Back-Kaisa glad----?” But the little girl now saw
that Back-Kaisa was far from glad and she was so crestfallen she could
have cried.

Then at last Back-Kaisa spoke:

“Hush up, Selma! You mustn’t talk when you’re facing such danger!
Never’ve I known worse! But for your sake, I’d ’ve got down and gone
home long ago.”

The little girl sat pondering the reply, not quite satisfied. She was
never afraid when with Back-Kaisa, so why should Back-Kaisa be afraid
when she was with _her?_ It was nice of her, though, not to get down
and go home; but it would have been nicer if she had felt too happy to
be scared.




IV

IN THE CABIN ON THE “UDDEHOLM”


THE Mårbacka folk, though still on their journey, no longer sat in fear
and trembling in the jolting carriage. Now they were on board a fine
steamer called the _Uddeholm._

They had spent the day in Karlstad, shopping and visiting with
relatives. Toward evening they left the city and stood waiting a good
while on the long pier that shoots far out into big Lake Vänern. No
shore being visible in one direction, Back-Kaisa had at once become
alarmed; she thought that _over there_ must be the edge of the world.
Wonderful to behold--for her as for the others--was the pretty steamer
as she emerged from that “shoreless place” and came gliding toward the
pier to take them on board.

When Back-Kaisa saw how her master and mistress, Mamselle Lovisa,
Johan, and Anna all went up the gangplank without the least hesitancy,
she of course followed, albeit reluctantly. She probably thought
Lieutenant Lagerlöf had conscience enough not to expose his little ones
deliberately to the peril of death. But what would become of them once
they reached the world’s end? That was something beyond her ken. She
would have liked to remain on deck to see whether the water went down a
chasm, or wherever it went. But when dusk began to settle, the Mårbacka
women and children were requested to go below-decks. They were
conducted into something called a cabin, the smallest room they had
ever seen, where they arranged themselves for the night.

On a narrow sofa that took up the whole side of one wall, Fru Lagerlöf
lay without undressing. Opposite, on a similar sofa, was Mamselle
Lovisa. Over Fru Lagerlöf, on a sort of shelf, Johan was stowed, and
Anna occupied another shelf above Mamselle Lovisa’s sofa. On the floor,
between the two sofas, with some blankets under them, lay Back-Kaisa
and Selma. Thus, every bit of space was occupied; there was not the
least little corner where one might stand or sit.

The lights were extinguished, the good-nights said, and everyone
settled down to sleep. For a time it was dead still in the cabin. Then,
all at once, the floor began to go up and down in the strangest way!
The little girl rolled like a ball, first over toward Fru Lagerlöf’s
sofa, then back toward the nurse. It was great fun; only she could not
understand why the floor did not hold still. Presently she heard her
mother and her aunt whisper to each other.

“I must have eaten too much of that rich salmon at the Sjöstedts’,”
said her mother.

“I thought at the time it was not very sensible food they set before
us,” Aunt Lovisa remarked. “And they knew we were to be out on Vänern.”

“No, Vänern isn’t pleasant!” sighed Fru Lagerlöf.

Then Back-Kaisa, too, began to whisper.

“Say, _Frua_, are we there yet?--there where the sea stops, and the
water rushes down the bottomless pit?”

“My dear girl, there’ll be no stop to the sea to-night!” said Fru
Lagerlöf, who did not know what Back-Kaisa was talking about.

Again there was silence for a space, but not stillness. The floor
rocked on and the little girl continued her delightful rolling.

Fru Lagerlöf struck a match and lit the lantern.

“I must see whether the children are able to hold themselves on their
shelves,” she said.

“Lord be praised for the light!” said Mamselle Lovisa. “Anyhow, there’s
no chance of our getting a wink of sleep to-night.”

“Oh, Frua! Oh, Mamselle Lovisa! don’t you feel that we’re going down
and down?” Back-Kaisa wailed. “Oh, how’ll we ever get out of this deep?
How’ll we ever get back home?”

“Now, whatever does she mean?” queried Mamselle Lovisa.

“She says that we have reached the last extremity,” Fru Lagerlöf
interpreted--no more comprehending than the other.

The little girl had a faint suspicion that they were uneasy. As for
herself, she was exceedingly comfortable, lying as it were in a big
rocking-swing.

The door-handle turned, the red hanging was swept to one side, and in
the doorway stood Lieutenant Lagerlöf, chuckling.

“How is it, Gustaf?” asked Fru Lagerlöf anxiously. “Will it be a gale,
do you think?”

“So you’re awake, all of you,” said the Lieutenant. “Ay, it has blown
up a bit,” he conceded in a reassuring tone. “The Captain thought I’d
better come down and tell you it will be no worse than it is.”

“What are you up to now?” Mamselle Lovisa asked him. “Aren’t you going
to bed?”

“Where do you think I should sleep, Sister dear?” And there was
something so screamingly funny about him as he stood in the doorway
(further he could not come), looking up and down as if in search of a
sleeping place--it set them all laughing. Fru Lagerlöf and Mamselle
Lovisa, who had been lying there fearful and a little seasick, now sat
up in their bunks to have their laugh out. Johan and Anna laughed so
hard they nearly shook themselves off their “shelves.” Back-Kaisa
forgot for the moment that she would soon be at that dreadful place
where the lake ends, and laughed, too, and the little girl by her side
was fairly choking with laughter.

Lieutenant Lagerlöf, who seldom laughed aloud, looked highly pleased.

“All’s right with you, I see,” he said. “So now I’ll go up again and
chin with the captain.” Whereupon he bade them a cheery good-night, and
went his way.

In the cabin the feeling of uneasiness and the qualms of seasickness
returned. Fru Lagerlöf again made futile attempts to quiet Back-Kaisa,
who went on moaning and wailing that they were getting nearer and
nearer that bottomless pit. The little girl by her side must have
fallen asleep, for she remembered no more of that night’s experiences.




V

AT THE GOLDSMITH’S SHOP


THE most trying part of the journey was over. The travellers were
safely landed at Göteborg, where they cast away all care and set out in
the glorious summer weather to view the city.

They wandered up Östra Hamngatan. Lieutenant Lagerlöf, stick in hand,
hat pushed far back on his head, spectacles drawn far down on his nose,
was in the lead. Behind him walked Fru Lagerlöf, holding Johan by the
hand; behind her, Mamselle Lovisa, leading Anna; and last came
Back-Kaisa who carried Selma on her arm--for it would never do, she
thought, to let the little girl ride pig-back in a city.

Lieutenant Lagerlöf had donned a brown coat and light straw hat. Fru
Lagerlöf and Mamselle Lovisa were attired in voluminous black silk
skirts and fine velvet bodices, with white inserts and wrist-ruffles,
over which they wore large cashmere shawls--folded tricornerwise--that
almost concealed their dresses; and they had on Panama hats with broad,
floppy brims. Johan was in black velvet breeches and smock, and Anna
was dressed in a stiffly starched blue polka-dot print worn over a
crinoline; and she had both hat and parasol. Selma had on a dress
exactly like Anna’s, only she was wearing a sunbonnet instead of a hat,
and had neither parasol nor crinoline.

The Lieutenant suddenly halted, turned, and looked back at his line of
women and children. He nodded and smiled. It was plain he liked having
them with him.

“Here none of us has ever been before,” he said, “so now we’ll look
about.”

They sauntered on up the street, now looking at the buildings, now at
the canals and little bridges, at passing vehicles and promenaders, at
signs and lamp-posts; but most of all, of course, they peered into shop
windows.

The Lieutenant did not hurry them, he wanted them to see and enjoy as
much as their eyes could take in.

“Nobody here knows us, so gaze as long as you like,” said he.

Mamselle Lovisa stopped before a milliner’s window, where a hat trimmed
with white swansdown and pink rosebuds had caught her eye. There she
stood, with Anna by the hand, as if rooted to the spot. And of course
Lieutenant and Fru Lagerlöf, Johan, Back-Kaisa, and Selma were also
obliged to stop before the swansdown hat. But Mamselle Lovisa was not
thinking of them; she stood as in a trance. It tickled the Lieutenant
to see her so carried away, though after a long, vain wait for her to
“come back,” so to speak, he lost patience.

“You’re not thinking of copying that hat, Lovisa?” he said. “Why,
that’s more suitable for a girl of seventeen.”

“It may be a pleasure perhaps for one who is not so young to look at
pretty things,” retorted Mamselle Lovisa, who, though past her first
youth, was still comely and rather elegant in her attire.

When they were well away from the swansdown hat they came to a
goldsmith’s shop. Now it was the Lieutenant who stopped first. As he
stood feasting his eyes on the trays of sparkling rings and bracelets,
shining silver spoons and goblets, and much else displayed in the
window, he ejaculated innocent oaths of delight.

“Here we’ll go in!” he said abruptly.

“But, Gustaf!” Fru Lagerlöf protested, “we can’t be buying such things
now.”

She laid a restraining hand on his arm, for he had already opened the
big plate-glass door of the shop and was stepping in. There was nothing
for the others to do but follow. By the time they were all inside he
was over at the counter talking to a young clerk.

“No, thank you, I don’t wish to buy anything,” he said. “But, seeing so
many choice things in the window, I thought I’d just step in and ask if
I might also have a peep at the fine wares you have in the shop.”

The clerk looked a bit uneasy, and seemed at a loss what to reply. Fru
Lagerlöf and Mamselle Lovisa now stood with their hands on the
Lieutenant’s shoulders, trying to drag him away.

The goldsmith himself presently emerged from an inner room. He had
evidently heard them come in, and probably thought he would do a brisk
trade. Placing himself beside the clerk, he put the flat of his hands
on the counter and inquired invitingly what was desired.

Lieutenant Lagerlöf repeated in substance what he had said to the
clerk--that he would very much like to see the beautiful wares in the
place though he could not afford to purchase any.

The goldsmith cocked his head and looked at the Lieutenant out of the
corner of his eye.

“The gentleman, I take it, is a Värmlander?” he said.

“Hell, yes, of course I’m a Värmlander!” the Lieutenant wagged back.
“What the deuce else should I be?”

Then everybody roared. The clerks all crowded round the Lieutenant, and
from the inner rooms came a finely dressed woman--the wife of the
goldsmith--who wanted to know what the fun was about.

Fru Lagerlöf and Mamselle Lovisa were so mortified they could have
wished themselves back in the jolting carriage on the Karlstad road, or
the rocking boat on stormy Vänern--anywhere but in that fine shop!

“Come now, Gustaf,” they urged, “for pity’s sake let us get out of
here!”

“No, no, please don’t go!” begged the goldsmith in his most persuasive
tone. “We should be so happy to show you what we carry here.”

He gave orders to the clerks, who ran up ladders and brought down
everything from the shelves, opened cabinets, and took out all their
contents, so that the long counter was literally covered with gold and
silverware. The shop-keeper and his wife took up each article and
showed it to the strangers, explaining its workmanship and what it was
for.

Lieutenant Lagerlöf drew off his spectacles and polished the lenses
with his silk handkerchief, the better to see. He picked up heavy
silver tankards and examined their ornamentations, admiring and
praising them.

“I say, Lovisa, this is worse than at the Deanery in Sunne!” he
remarked to his sister.

Another time he held a large silver salver before the eyes of
Back-Kaisa. “The Giant of Åsbergen doesn’t dine off finer plate--eh,
Kaisa?” he said.

The clerks sniggered and joked among themselves, having fun at his
expense. The goldsmith and his wife were also enjoying themselves, but
in a different way. They were friendly, and liked the Lieutenant. It
was not long before they knew who he was, and whom he had with him;
that he was on his way to Strömstad to seek a cure for a child who had
some hip trouble and could not walk.

Fru Lagerlöf and Mamselle Lovisa, seeing that all went well, composed
themselves and began to look at and delight in the display. Fru
Lagerlöf was pleased to find an old design in silver spoons, such as
they once had in her parental home, and Mamselle Lovisa became quite
as enraptured with a sugar bowl as she had been shortly before with the
swansdown hat.

When they had finally seen enough and were saying good-bye, it seemed
almost as if they were parting from old friends. The goldsmith, his
wife, and all the clerks followed them out into the street. Passers-by
must have thought they had made purchases amounting to thousands of
kronor.

“I really must apologize,” said Lieutenant Lagerlöf, putting out his
hand in a final farewell.

“Don’t think of it, Lieutenant!” answered the goldsmith.

“But we have put you to so much trouble,” Fru Lagerlöf interpolated in
a deprecating tone.

“We have had a most enjoyable hour,” the goldsmith assured her, “so
don’t be uneasy about us! One has to do something for one’s own
pleasure, now and then, though one does stand in a shop.”

As the Lieutenant continued his stroll up Östra Hamngatan his hat was
pushed farther back on his head than usual. He flourished his cane as
he stepped along, proud of his adventure.

Fru Lagerlöf said in a low voice to Mamselle Lovisa: “I can’t tell you
how anxious I was; I thought we would surely be thrown out.”

“It would never have done for any one but Gustaf,” replied Mamselle
Lovisa, “but no one can resist him.”




VI

GRAY ISLAND


NOW the Mårbacka folk had no anxiety in providing for the table; they
had only to run out to the market and purchase whatever was needed.
They were not worrying about the cows not having good pasturage, nor
the oats not coming up; they lived amid barren cliffs and water, and
had forgotten there were such things in the world as fields and
meadows. Nor did they have to stand in a hot kitchen preparing fancy
dishes for far-come guests, nor worry their heads out of joint
wondering where they’d find sleeping-room and bedding enough for all.
If the animals sickened or the housekeeper and the maids fell to
quarrelling, they were blissfully unaware of it. They had freedom and
leisure for healthful amusements, with no cares or annoyances of any
sort.

Never had they led such an easy, comfortable life. Fru Lagerlöf, who
had come to Strömstad rather thin and worn, took on flesh and colour.
She soon looked and felt ten years younger. Mamselle Lovisa, who was
quite stout and logy, and so diffident she could hardly open her mouth
when among strangers, lost weight, grew better looking, and more
sociable. Johan and Anna made many friends among the little Strömstad
children. Johan was quite wild about crabbing, and Anna had become so
attached to two little girls, daughters of the confectioner, who were
continually treating her to sweets, they both declared they never
wanted to go home again.

As for the little sick girl, there had been no marked improvement; she
was apparently no better or stronger. But that did not seem to trouble
her. She had got her wish: Back-Kaisa and she were again inseparable
friends; she could order her about and was being petted and spoiled by
her just as in the first days of her illness.

But the one who had the best time was Lieutenant Lagerlöf. The first
week or so he must have got many a sharp look and curt reply when he
spoke to every person he met, as was his wont when walking along the
road at home. But he was not daunted. It was a point of honour with him
to be on friendly terms with people. Nor could the Strömstaders resist
him in the long run. A smile lighted up the solemn faces of the pious
women of the Schartuan sect when they passed him in the street. He had
been in their cottages and drunk coffee with them, had asked after
their husbands, and had praised their children. A gang of small boys
tagged after him in the street, for they had discovered that he always
had a pocketful of coppers. With the fishermen he was on so solid a
footing that one after another asked him to go out mackerel fishing.
All the old retired sea captains, who went about at home bored and
longing to be out at sea, treated him to grog on their little verandas,
and told him of their adventures and perils in the days when they
knocked about the world.

Lieutenant Lagerlöf liked the people, and wanted to know how they lived
their lives in their part of the country. He was no respecter of
persons, but spoke to all, high and low, and he never lacked for topics
of conversation. Good-humoured, kindly man that he was, it was not
strange the Strömstaders liked him. And it cannot be said that he did
not know his power.

Fortune favoured the Mårbacka folk in every way on this sojourn. For
one thing, they found dear old friends from Värmland, in whose company
they spent many pleasant hours. They were a Professor Tobiaeson of
Filipstad, his wife and two sisters, and Professor Lundström, a
bachelor--all of their own social circle.

Together, they made up a boating party and went sailing nearly every
day. These outings were the delight of the children, for the
Lieutenant, in his inimitable way, would then tell of his interesting
encounters with the Strömstad folk. Besides, they always had a couple
of large, well-stocked hampers in the boat, so that when they grew
tired of sailing they could go ashore on one of the little rock islands
and have a picnic spread. Then the children would run about and gather
sea-shells--something they had never seen before. They wondered at
their being allowed to take as many as they wished of these rare
treasures, and they loved them as they loved the flowers and the
berries of the field.

They were now out on one of their cruises. The weather was fine with
just enough wind; the picnic baskets were full of goodies, and the
Lieutenant was loaded with anecdotes. Everyone was looking forward to a
pleasant evening.

Then, unhappily, some one remarked that they had not yet visited the
island just outside Strömstad known as Gray Island. So they immediately
decided to lay-to at the island on the return sail, and have their
little supper there.

It seems that some hundred years back there lived on Gray Island an
infamous old troll named Tita Gray, who was said to be more powerful
than the Old Nick himself. When she was alive no human being was
allowed to set foot on the island. Those who ventured met with instant
mishap--broke an arm or a leg or slipped on the slimy rocks, and fell
into the sea.

Since Tita Gray had long been dead and gone, it must be quite safe to
visit the island, they thought. All the same the skipper warned them.
He told how he and a couple of fellows were walking across the island
one day in the spring, when suddenly one of them went down a cleft and
fractured his leg.

That made the island all the more alluring to the party; they could
hardly wait to set foot on it. Presently the boat turned toward the
island and slipped in under the towering cliff wall. The skipper
looked for a suitable mooring place.

Just then little Anna pulled at her mother’s arm, and said: “Mamma,
Selma is crying.”

True, the child sat weeping. She had not been at all afraid during the
sail--not till that moment. She, like the others, had thought it would
be great fun to go ashore on Gray Island; but now that they were right
under the rocky cliff, it looked so dark and menacing.

They all asked her why she was crying, but she would not say. She could
not tell them she was afraid of a rock. However, she escaped further
questioning, for the skipper had at last found a landing-place, and
they had something else to think of.

The instant the boat struck, Professor Lundström seized the painter and
jumped ashore. Then, as if an invisible hand had dealt him a blow in
the chest, he staggered backwards and slipped off the ledge into the
sea.

There was great consternation, and cries of alarm went up, but there
was no long agony of suspense. With the swiftness of a gull after a
fish, the skipper reached over the side of the boat, nabbed the long
professor by the coat-collar and drew him up, dripping wet, of course,
but quite unhurt.

Naturally, they were all very much shaken by the ghastly sight of a man
going down into the perilous deep, and though, luckily, nothing serious
had happened, they could not throw off their depression.

Professor Lundström then suggested that the whole party go ashore, and
let him take the boat so that he might go back to Strömstad and change
his clothes. As it was only a short sail, the boat could return for
them whenever they wished.

But they had had enough of Gray Island. No one felt the least desire to
step ashore and climb the threatening cliff.

As they sailed back to Strömstad they must have wondered if after all
there was not some truth in the old myth about the island. In any case,
it was a strange coincidence that the mishap should have occurred just
there. They had been to most of the other little islands of the
Strömstad skerries, and all had gone well.

“I thought it almost uncanny when the child began to cry,” said one of
the sisters Tobiaeson. “I knew then that something would happen.”

“Now what does Lieutenant Lagerlöf think about it?” queried the other
sister.

“What do I think? Well,” he replied, “I say it couldn’t have turned out
differently when we sent a school-priest like him ashore. He was no man
for Tita Gray.”

“Do you mean, Lieutenant, that if we had sent another--yourself
perhaps--we would have had a better reception?”

“Gad, yes!” exploded the Lieutenant.

Lord, how they laughed! The pall of gloom lifted in a twinkling, as
they pictured the meeting between Lieutenant Lagerlöf and Tita Gray.

Aye, aye, he knew right enough that he could have managed her.

Lord, how they laughed!




VII

THE BIRD OF PARADISE


THEY had taken for the summer a cosy little cottage at the end of
Karlagatan, where they were so happy and content that Lieutenant
Lagerlöf and the children named the place Little Mårbacka, which was
assuredly the highest title of distinction they could bestow on a house
in a strange city.

The little house fronted a bit of a garden enclosed by a picket-fence,
and under the spreading trees they had their breakfasts and suppers. At
the back of the house were a couple of potato patches, beyond which,
over against a high cliff, stood a tiny hut not much larger than the
cabin on the _Uddeholm._

In that hut lived their hostess, Fru Strömberg, who was the wife of a
sea captain. During the winter months she occupied the cottage herself,
but summers she always let it to visitors. She now sat in her tiny
cabin from morn till night, surrounded by blooming oleanders and tables
and shelves laden with curios her husband had brought from foreign
parts.

When Fru Lagerlöf and Mamselle Lovisa were having coffee with their
friends and the Lieutenant had gone mackerel-fishing, and when Anna
had gone over to the candy man’s daughters’ and Johan to his crabs,
Back-Kaisa and Selma would repair to Fru Strömberg’s cabin.

Fru Strömberg was their special friend, and to sit with her under the
oleanders was as restful as sitting with Grandmother on the corner sofa
at Mårbacka. She could not tell stories, but she had many wonderful
things to show them: big sea-shells that were full of sound and
murmured when you put them to your ear; porcelain men from China with
long pig-tails and long moustaches; and she had besides two very big
shells, one a cocoanut, the other an ostrich egg.

Back-Kaisa and Fru Strömberg talked mostly of serious and religious
things, which the child did not understand; but sometimes they touched
on lighter subjects.

Fru Strömberg spoke of her husband and his voyages. He had a fine big
ship called the _Jacob_, and just now he was on a voyage to St. Ypes,
Portugal, to take on a cargo of salt. Back-Kaisa wondered how Fru
Strömberg could have any peace of mind, knowing that her husband was
drifting about on the perilous seas; Fru Strömberg replied that there
was One who protected him, and therefore she felt that he was as safe
on board his ship as when at home in the streets of Strömstad.

The kindly Fru Strömberg then turned to the little girl and said she
hoped the captain would soon be at home, for there was something on the
_Jacob_ she thought Selma might like to see. They had a bird of
paradise there.

“What is that?” asked the child, all interest now.

“It is a bird from Paradise,” Fru Strömberg told her.

“Selma has heard her grandmother talk about Paradise,” Back-Kaisa put
in.

Yes, of course. She remembered that Granny had told her about Paradise,
and that she (Selma) had pictured it as a place that looked like the
little rose-garden on the west side of the house at Mårbacka. At the
same time it was clear to her that Paradise had something to do with
God. And now she somehow got the impression that the one who guarded
Fru Strömberg’s husband so that he was as safe at sea as on land was
the bird of paradise.

She wanted so much to meet that bird. It might be able to help her.
Everyone felt so sorry for her mamma and papa because she was not
getting well. And to think that they had made this expensive trip only
on her account.

She would have liked to ask Back-Kaisa and Fru Strömberg whether they
thought the bird of paradise would do something for her, but she was
too shy. They might laugh at her, she feared. But she did not forget
what Fru Strömberg had told her. Every day she wished the _Jacob_ would
come, so that the bird of paradise could fly ashore.

Then one day she heard, to her great joy, that the _Jacob_ had arrived.
But she did not speak of this to any one. To her there was something
very sacred and mysterious about it all. Remembering how solemn her
grandmother had been when telling about Adam and Eve, she did not want
to tell Johan and Anna that on the _Jacob_ there was a bird from
Paradise which she was going to ask to cure her leg. No, she would not
speak of it even to Back-Kaisa.

Now every time she went to see Fru Strömberg she expected to find the
bird sitting warbling in one of her oleanders. But he did not appear.
How strange! she thought. One day she asked Back-Kaisa about it, and
was told the bird was on the ship. “But you’ll soon see it,” said
Back-Kaisa, “for to-morrow we’re all going on board the _Jacob._”

It seems that Captain Strömberg had hardly been home a day before he
and Lieutenant Lagerlöf were bosom friends. The Lieutenant had already
been out on the _Jacob_ several times, and liked it so well that
nothing would do but the whole family must see what a fine ship she
was.

When they set out none of them had any real notion as to what boarding
the _Jacob_ meant. The little girl thought the ship would be lying
alongside the quay like the big steamers. But indeed she lay in the
offing. They had to get into a little boat and row out. It was strange
to see that the nearer they got to the ship the larger she grew, till
at last she loomed high as a mountain. To those in the rowboat it
looked quite impossible to clamber up _there._

Mamselle Lovisa said straight out that if it was to that high boat they
were rowing she could not go aboard.

“Wait a bit, Lovisa,” said the Lieutenant, “and you’ll see it’s easier
than you imagine.”

Then Mamselle Lovisa declared she would as soon think of climbing the
flagpole at Laholmen. She thought they had better turn back at once.

Fru Lagerlöf and Back-Kaisa agreed with her, and were for going home.
But Lieutenant Lagerlöf stuck to his point. There was no fear but
they’d get aboard all right, he said. This was perhaps their one chance
of a lifetime to see how it looked on a merchant vessel; and they ought
not to miss such an opportunity.

“But once we’re up we’ll never be able to get down again,” argued
Mamselle Lovisa.

They met a boat laden with sacks.

“See that boat, Lovisa?” the Lieutenant said. “Do you know what’s in
those sacks?”

“My dear Gustaf,” returned Mamselle Lovisa wearily, “how should I
know?”

“Well, they’re sacks of salt from the _Jacob_,” the Lieutenant informed
her. “They have neither arms nor legs, yet they’ve come off the ship;
so surely you should be able to do it.”

“You ought to dress up once in crinoline and long skirts,” snapped
Mamselle Lovisa, “then perhaps you’d not be so brave.”

They went on like that the whole way out to the ship. The little girl
who so longed to meet the bird of paradise wished with all her heart
that her father might induce her aunt and the others to go on board;
though she, too, thought they could never in the world get up there.

All the same they presently lay-to under a swaying rope-ladder. A
couple of sailors jumped into the boat to help them with the climb. The
first to be taken was the little sick girl. One of the sailors boosted
her to his comrade, who bore her up the ladder and put her down on the
deck; here he left her to go and help the others.

She found herself standing quite alone on a narrow strip of deck.
Before her opened a great yawning hole, at the bottom of which
something white was being put into sacks. She stood there a long while.
Some of the folks down in the boat must have raised objections to
climbing the ladder, since no one appeared. When the little girl had
got her bearings, she glanced about for the bird of paradise. She
looked up at the rigging and tackle. She had pictured the bird as being
at least as large as a turkey, and easy for the eye to find.

Seeing no sign of it, she turned to the Captain’s cabin-boy, who had
just come up, and asked him where the bird of paradise was.

“Come along,” he said, “and you shall see him.” He gave her a hand lest
she might fall down the hole; then walking backwards, he led her down
the companionway into the Captain’s cabin--a fine room, with polished
mahogany walls and mahogany furniture.

In there, sure enough, was the bird of paradise!

The bird was even more beautiful than her imagination had pictured it.
It was not alive, yet it stood in the middle of the table--whole and
perfect in all its gorgeous plumage.

The little girl climbed up on to a chair and from there to the table.
Then she sat down beside the bird and regarded its beauty. The
cabin-boy, who stood by, showed her its long, light, drooping feathers.

“Look!” he said. “You can see he’s from Paradise, for he hasn’t any
feet.”[1]

  [1] The first birds of paradise seen in Europe were mounted without
  feet.--TRANSLATOR.

Now that seemed to fit in very well with her own concept of Paradise: a
place where one did not have to walk but moved about on wings. She
gazed at the bird in adoration, her hands folded as in prayer. She
wondered if the cabin-boy knew it was the bird that protected Captain
Strömberg, but dared not ask him.

The child could have sat there all day lost in wonder; but her reverie
was suddenly interrupted by loud shouts from the deck. It sounded as if
someone were calling, “Selma! Selma!”

Immediately afterwards, they all came rushing into the
cabin--Lieutenant Lagerlöf, Back-Kaisa, Fru Lagerlöf, Captain
Strömberg, Johan, and Anna. They were so many they quite filled the
room.

“How did you get here?” they asked as with one breath--wonder and
amazement depicted on their faces.

With that, the little girl remembered that she had walked on the deck,
had walked down the stairs and into the cabin--that no one had carried
her.

“Now come down off the table,” said one, “and let us see whether you
can walk.”

She crawled from the table to the chair, and from the chair to the
floor. Yes, she could both stand and walk.

How they rejoiced! Their hopes had not been in vain; the object of the
journey was fulfilled. The little girl was not going to grow up a
helpless cripple, but a normal human being.

The grown folk said it was the splendid baths at Strömstad that had
wrought the change. With tears of joy and gratitude, they blessed the
sea, the air, the city and all therein--glad they had come.

The little girl, meanwhile, had her own thoughts about it. She wondered
if it was not the bird of paradise that had helped her. Was it not the
little marvel with the quivering wings which had come from that land
where feet were not needed that had taught her to walk here on this
earth, where it was such a very necessary thing?




VIII

THE KEEPSAKE


THEY had said good-bye to Fru Strömberg and “Little Mårbacka.” The
children had packed away their precious sea-shells and the grown-ups had
locked their trunks. They were now going aboard the steamer that was to
bear them away from Strömstad.

A lot of people had gathered at the wharf. There stood Captain
Strömberg, their boating companions, and other summer visitors whose
acquaintance they had made, and many, many more.

“All the old pilots and skippers and fishermen in town must be here,”
observed a gentleman who had cruised with the Mårbacka folk.

“Yes; and all the fishwives and female bath attendants to boot,” said
another.

“They must have come down to bid Gustaf good-bye,” Fru Lagerlöf
remarked. “He seems to know everyone.”

Lieutenant Lagerlöf had to say farewell to so many that he came near
losing the boat. They all knew he had come to Strömstad to seek a cure
for a little child that could not walk, and had taken this opportunity
to offer their felicitations on the happy outcome.

“Ay, but it’s good, Lieutenant, to see the little gal standin’ on the
deck with the other kiddies,” said an old fisherman.

“It must have been your weakfish, Olaus, that set her up.”

“Ay, weakfish’s good eatin’,” the old man nodded.

The Lieutenant had already turned to a group of bath attendants.

“I give you thanks,” he said, “for you, also, had a share in the good
work.”

“You must come aboard, Gustaf,” Fru Lagerlöf shouted from the deck.
“The siren has sounded for the third time.”

At the very last moment two little girls ran up the gangplank and over
to the Lagerlöf girls. They curtsied, shook hands, wished them _bon
voyage_, slipped Anna and Selma each a parcel, then hurried ashore.

They were the daughters of the confectioner with whom Anna had played
all summer. Selma hardly knew them at all, and was quite overwhelmed by
their kindness in giving her, too, a parting gift.

Unfolding the wrapper, she found something very pretty--a strip of
bright red satin ribbon, pasted on a bit of cardboard, on which there
were some letters embroidered in black silk.

“It’s a bookmark,” Back-Kaisa said; “and that you should lay in the
prayer book.”

“‘Remembrance’ it says there,” her mother explained. “That means you
must never forget the little girl who worked it for you.”

The red satin ribbon with the black embroidered letters nestled between
the covers of her prayer book for many, many years. When on a Sunday at
church she would open the book and let her eyes rest on the bit of
ribbon, it carried her back in memory to days long gone by.

She sensed the odours of the sea and before her eyes rose a vision of
boats and sea-faring folk--hardly the sea itself, but sea-shells and
jelly-fish and crabs and star-fish and weakfish and mackerel. Then from
some obscure recess of memory emerged the little red house in
Karlagatan. She saw the bird of paradise, Fru Strömberg, the _Jacob_,
Gray Island, Östra Hamngatan, the _Uddeholm_, and the three horses that
drew the big carriage. And last, she saw the horses turn in on a large
sward, surrounded by low red buildings and enclosed by a white fence.
They stopped before a wide red house, with small windows and a little
porch, and she heard all in the carriage cry as with one voice: “Thank
God we’re home again!”

The others, she remembered, recognized the place at once as Mårbacka,
but not she. Had she been alone she would not have known what place it
was. To be sure, she remembered her home, though until then she had
never seen how it looked.

On the porch stood a little sweet-faced, slightly bent, white-haired
old lady in a striped skirt and black jacket. That was her grandmother.
Her she remembered quite well, though she had never before noticed her
appearance.

It was the same with her brother Daniel and the baby, the housekeeper
and Othello the spaniel--they were all quite new to her. True, she
remembered them in a way; but this was the first time she had actually
seen them.

Moreover, sitting in the little church, her head bowed over the prayer
book, she knew that on that Strömstad visit she had not only learned to
walk but to see.

It was thanks to that journey that she remembered her nearest and
dearest as they were in their prime, when life was a joy to them. But
for that, everything relating to those times would have faded out of
mind. But with the help of the little red ribbon they lived on. “Let
not forgetfulness grow over all this,” the ribbon said to her.
“Remember your parents, who gave themselves no rest till they had found
a cure for you. Remember Back-Kaisa, her great love and patience, how
she braved the terrors of land and sea for your sake.”




THE OLD HOUSEKEEPER’S TALES




I

GRANDMOTHER


THE year after the Strömstad visit the little Mårbacka children had a
great sorrow. They lost their dear grandmother.

Almost up to the very last they had sat with her on the corner sofa in
the bedroom and listened to her stories and songs. They could not
remember a time when their grandmother had not sung and narrated to
them. It had been a glorious life. Never were children so favoured.

Where their grandmother had learned her stories and ballads they did
not know, but she herself believed every word of them. When she had
told something very wonderful, she would look deep into the eyes of the
little children and say, with the utmost conviction: “All this is as
true as that I see you and you see me.”

One morning when the children came down to breakfast they were not
allowed to go into the kitchen-bedroom as usual to say good-morning to
grandmother, because she was ill. All that day the corner sofa stood
empty and it seemed as if the long storyless hours would never end.

A few days later the children were told their grandmother was dead, and
when she lay shrouded they were brought in to kiss her hand. But they
were afraid. Then some one said it was the last time they might thank
Grandmother for all the pleasure she had given them. And then came the
day when the stories and songs were borne away, shut up in a long black
box, never to come again.

It was a sad loss to the little ones. It seemed as if the door to a
beautiful, enchanted world, where they had freely passed in and out,
had been closed. Now there was no one who knew how to open that door.

But after a while they learned to play with dolls and toys like other
children, and then it may have appeared as if they no longer missed
their grandmother or remembered her. But indeed she lived on in their
hearts. They never tired of listening to the stories of her the old
housekeeper told; they prized them as treasures they wanted to keep
always.




II

THE GHOST OF VILARSTENSBACKEN


THE old housekeeper used to say it could not have been so very long ago
that Mårbacka was first laid under the plow and became a regular
homestead. In the old mistress’s youth it was still within man’s memory
that the place had been a summer _säter_ belonging to one of the old
peasant farms to the west of the dale, nearer the Fryken.

But when in the world it was that the first herd of cattle grazed there
and the first cattle-sheds were built, who could say? Herdsmen can hold
to a place for thousands of years without leaving a trace after them.
And indeed there was not much here at Mårbacka that had come down from
their time.

The name Mårbacka, the old mistress believed, one of the herdsmen had
given to the hilly moors below Åsberget, where they drove their horses
and cattle to grass. She also thought they and their animals had beaten
the roads.

That the herdsmen had broken the south road, along Åsberget, was clear,
because from that direction they would have had to come with their
cattle. The steep road to the east, which went straight down the
mountain, was probably their work. By that they must have gone when
they wished to visit _säter_ folk on the other side of the mountain.
The wretched road running northwest, toward Sunne, must once have been
an old goat-path, and westward they could hardly have had any passage
at all. To the west lay swampy bottomlands, through which ran a
tortuous river. When the shepherdess stood upon the flat stone outside
her _säter_ cabin, she could see her home-farm on the other side of the
dale; but to get there, she had to go a long way round, to north or
southward.

The herdsmen must have wandered up from the south mostly, for
Vilarsten, or Resting-stone, where they were wont to rest after their
long tramp, still lay at the roadside, just south of the farm. But
there was something about that road that made people afraid to venture
out on it after dark.

At the time that Mårbacka was a summer _säter_ there lived in the
parish of Sunne a priest who was so harsh and exacting that a man who
had been a servant in his home a few months went and hanged himself.
The priest, when he learned what had happened, without stopping to
think, cut the body down and carried it out into the yard. Then,
because he had touched a suicide, and for no other reason, he was
regarded as polluted and disgraced. The people of Sunne would not allow
him to set foot in the church, which remained closed until another
clergyman was called.

The Sunne priest used also to officiate at Ämtervik, where they had
a church and a little parish house but no resident clergyman. He
probably thought that in an out-of-the-way place like Ämtervik no one
would know of his being “unclean”; there, surely, he might celebrate
the Mass, as usual. So he rode down to Ämtervik. But the evil report
was there before him. As he stood at the altar intoning the Mass,
murmurs ran through the congregation; the people thought him unworthy
to stand in the House of God. Nor did it end there. The Ämtervik
peasants felt that he had shown them great disrespect. They were as
good men as the Sunne folk, they said, and would not have a priest
others had repudiated.

A few among the younger peasants got together and planned to give him
something to remember. But knowing it was dangerous to lay violent
hands on a priest, they decided to wait till he set out for home. He
rode alone, and there were many lonely spots along the bridle-paths
between Ämtervik and Sunne where the men could lie in wait for him.

The priest must have sensed danger, for instead of taking the usual
road to Sunne to the west of the dale, he took the _säter_ paths to
eastward past Mårbacka--thinking to find his way home.

The men, ambushed at the roadside, seeing no sign of the priest, knew
of course that he had eluded them, and thought they would have to go
home without carrying out their purpose. But it happened that one of
the men was a brother to the servant who had taken his own life on
account of the priest and he was not going to let him escape so easily.
He seized a long stackpole which had been left standing in the field
since haying time, and set off toward the marshes; the others
did likewise--running and leaping across the bogs. Just below
Mårbacka-säter they touched firm ground; then, hurrying southward to
intercept the priest, they came upon him in the road near the
Resting-stone.

It may have been their intention merely to give him a sound thrashing;
but, unluckily, there was the man who had a brother to avenge. He had a
sword concealed under his cloak, and when the others had pulled the
priest off the horse and thrown him to the ground, the man drew his
sword and cut off the priest’s head.

The moment the deed was done they were filled with terror of discovery,
and thought only of escape. They let the horse run loose and left the
corpse lying at the roadside, to make it appear that the murder had
been committed by wild robbers. Running for home by the way they had
come, over the bogs, they hoped no one had seen them. They had not been
on any passable road, and their venturing across the marshes would not
have aroused suspicion.

Things went better than they expected. Inasmuch as the priest had been
at odds with his parishioners, there was no eager search for him. When
at last his body was found the crime was attributed to robbers and
outlaws. Even in death he was regarded as unclean. No one would
touch the body. Since the people deemed him unfit to rest in
consecrated ground, they let him lie where he was, merely covering him
with sod, over which they built a cairn of large stones to prevent wild
beasts digging him out.

But the priest could not find rest in the grave thus prepared for him.
On moonlight nights he would appear in the road near the Resting-stone
in his long cassock, holding his head between his hands. Horses saw him
plainer than humans did, and would shy and rear so that riders were
frequently obliged to make a long detour through the wild forest.

So long as there were only cowherds and shepherds at Mårbacka, these
ghostly appearances meant very little. It was quite another matter when
Mårbacka became a regular farmstead. How to lay the ghost none knew,
and year after year folk had to take care not to be out on the road
near the Resting-stone along about midnight.

The old mistress, however, had assured the housekeeper that nowadays
none need fear the headless priest. A housewife at Mårbacka--a
strong-minded, determined woman, who knew a little more than the common
run of folk--had laid the ghost.

That farm mistress happened to be out riding late one evening along
Vilarstensbacken when--just as she expected--the ghost appeared in the
road near the cairn, and made as if to bar her way.

The woman was neither awed nor frightened and her horse was as calm
and fearless as herself. She rode right up to the “spook,” and began to
admonish it.

“Why can’t you stay where you belong!” she said. “You know well enough
that no better grave awaits you. So don’t imagine you will be allowed
to lie in churchyard mould--you who were so corrupt when you died.”

This was spoken with firm conviction, for she knew, of course, that he
had been a hard man, and really considered him unworthy a decent
burial.

“You have no cause to rise out of your grave and demand vengeance,” she
went on, “for you only got what you deserved.”

When she said this, the ghost seemed to grow darker and more distinct;
it looked as if ready to fall upon her. Quite undaunted, she addressed
it again, determined to put an end to that nuisance.

“If you will lie still in your grave I promise you that my eldest son
shall take up your calling, and become a priest. He is a good lad and I
know that he will be one of those servants of our Lord who turn
people’s hearts toward God, and not away from Him.”

She had barely uttered the first words, when the ghost began to fade in
the moonlight till there was nothing left of it but a faint outline;
and before she had finished speaking, even that had vanished.

The Ghost of Vilarstensbacken never appeared again.

That torment luckily ended, there was increasing peace and comfort at
Mårbacka. The place became as fine a farm as any in the parish, and
the owners thrived and prospered.

All this, the old mistress had said, was undoubtedly true, for some
years later, in the beginning of the eighteenth century, a youth from
Mårbacka was sent to a theological seminary, where he studied for the
ministry and was finally ordained.

He called himself Morell, after his ancestral home, and in due time was
made curate at Ämtervik. He settled on his family estate (Mårbacka),
and was the first clergyman to reside within the parish--his
predecessors having all lived at Sunne and come down to Ämtervik only
on specified Sundays.

The peasants of Ämtervik were very glad to have their own pastor,
especially one who had a home of his own so that they did not have to
provide him with a living. To be sure, Mårbacka was a good distance
away from the church, but that disadvantage was more than made up for
by the priest’s being a man of independent means.

The parson’s pay was small, and of that little the lion’s share went to
the Dean of Sunne, so that the priest would have been as poor as the
proverbial church mouse but for Mårbacka.

In order that this arrangement, which was for the good of both pastor
and parishioners, might be perpetuated, the first clergyman at Mårbacka
gave one of his daughters in marriage to a priest by the name of
Lyselius, whom he made his heir to the estate and the office.

Lyselius, in his turn, did likewise: he married one of his daughters to
Pastor Eric Wennervik, who later came into the property and the office.

The old mistress had said that everyone seemed to think this an
excellent custom which should be kept up; even the clergymen’s
daughters, she thought, had been content to have it so.




III

PASTOR WENNERVIK


THE old mistress had also said it was the three clergymen, Morell,
Lyselius, and Wennervik, who built up Mårbacka.

Before their time the place was just a peasant farm, which, though
large and flourishing, looked like any other farmstead. If there were a
barn for ten cows and a stable for two horses, it was about all that
could be expected. The main house had perhaps but one large room, where
the entire household lived day and night, and a little pitch-dark
kitchen called the _kåve._ There were many other buildings, of
course--a larder, a bath house, a rye-loft and other sheds, a kiln, and
a smithy; but they must have been rather small, as the farm at that
time was not nearly so extensive as it is now. Only the nearest fields
were then under cultivation.

The old mistress used to wonder how the three clergymen had managed to
build a stable for ten horses and a cow-house for thirty cows, besides
all the big granaries, storehouses, and sheds which they seemed to have
required. The brew house with an adjoining room, which was used for a
farm-office, were also from their time, likewise the milk-room,
loom-room, and bailiff’s lodge.

Finally, along in the seventeen-nineties the old mistress’s father,
Pastor Wennervik, built a new dwelling which was planned on a more
modest scale than the other buildings. He was satisfied with a
one-story house of four rooms and kitchen, and an attic with two gable
chambers. But all the rooms, including the kitchen, were large and
light, and so admirably adapted to living purposes that hominess, so to
speak, met one with open arms at the threshold.

Pastor Wennervik had also laid out the kitchen garden with its aromatic
herb-beds and fruit trees, and the little rose garden. He was the son
of a master gardener, and was himself quite clever at gardening. Many
little rose bushes and grafted apple trees still growing on the farms
round Ämtervik he had helped set out.

In his youth he had been tutor at a great manor, where he conceived a
fancy for fences and gates. Round the kitchen garden at Mårbacka he put
a pretty white paling, with ornamental gates, and another round the
rose garden. If one wished to drive in from the road, one had first to
open a great gate, then pass range on range of out-buildings, with
fences and gates at several points. It was the same with the front
yard.

The children loved to hear about their great-grandfather, Pastor
Wennervik. They had found in a corner cupboard of the farm-office some
old books in Greek and Latin which bore his signature, also a number of
poems by Bellman and Leopold copied in his hand. They knew that the
harpsichord and guitar had come to Mårbacka in his time, and they
created in fancy a beautiful image of him. It was not only from the old
housekeeper they had heard anecdotes of him, but also from their father
and their father’s sisters. He was a charming gentleman of fine taste,
who always liked to wear good clothes and who loved flowers and apples.
He must have been a bird-lover, too, for it was he who put up the
octangular dove-cote that stood on the green outside the kitchen
window. He had planned and worked to make Mårbacka a beautiful home.
The clergymen who dwelt there before him must have lived mostly in the
peasant manner, while he had softened the old severe simplicity by
introducing some of the manners and customs of gentlefolk, thus
rendering life there richer and easier.

There was an old oil painting at Mårbacka from the time of Pastor
Wennervik. It was a portrait of his early love--a rich and high-born
young lady of the Province of Västergötland. He had been tutor to her
brother, and being no doubt the best looking and most charming young
man she had met up to then, she fell in love with him, and he with her.
The lovers had their trysting places in the bowers of the manor park,
where they spoke of their love and pledged eternal fidelity. But one
day they were discovered, and the young tutor was promptly dismissed.

All that was left to him of love’s young dream was this counterfeit
presentment of his sweetheart. The young lady’s portrait had not been
done by a skilled artist; the face on the canvas under the powdered
hair was set and expressionless; it looked more like a pretty doll than
the likeness of a human countenance. However, the features were of
delicate mould, and to him who had seen her eyes sparkle and her lips
curve in a smile, the portrait was beautiful enough. Pastor Wennervik
perhaps felt some of the old glow of youth in his heart when his gaze
rested on the picture.

Mayhap ’twas the portrait which inspired the obscure country parson to
surround himself with flowers and birds, to enhance the beauty of life
with music and poetry.




IV

THE GANDER


THERE was only one thing the children had against Pastor
Wennervik--that in his late years he had married Jungfru Raklitz, the
dreadful old housekeeper-person who had gone from manor to manor and
been harassed and tormented by hard mistresses, until she, in her turn,
became a plague and a torment.

If Pastor Wennervik must needs have married again he should at least
have thought to protect his dear daughter against the stepmother. That
she was allowed to treat the girl as she saw fit, to scold and chastise
her and put upon her an unreasonable amount of work--that, the children
could never forgive him.

How they loved the billy-goat that got drunk on dregs and butted into
old Raklitz, upsetting both her and her brandy cruse. They also sided
with the market folk at the Ombergshed Fair who stole her apples and
shouted back to her that the Mårbacka parson was too good a man to take
money from poor folk for his apples. And they gloried in the bold thief
who broke into her larder after she’d had a new lock put on the door
which was so big and strong it might have done for a prison gate. And
they were ready to burst into tears at the thought of the poor
goosey-gander!

One fine April day, in the time of Fru Raklitz, all the Mårbacka geese
had been let out in the farmyard. Suddenly some wild geese came flying
high above them, honking and shrieking as usual. The tame geese flapped
their wings and squawked back--the way they do every spring.

As flock after flock of wild geese flew over, the tame geese grew more
and more restless, and before any one knew what was up, a big gander
darted into the air and joined the wild geese in their flight.

Everyone expected that he would soon turn back; but indeed he did
nothing of the sort. When he was not there by the next morning, they
thought they’d never lay eyes on him again. He must have fallen prey to
the fox or the eagle, they said, if he had not actually become winded
and dropped dead from exhaustion. It was inconceivable that a tame
goose could fly with wild geese to the far north.

Nothing was seen or heard of the gander the whole summer. But when
autumn came, and the wild geese flew southward, shrieking and calling
as always, the tame geese again lifted their wings and answered them.

Fru Raklitz, seeing how excited the geese were, and being more wary
this time than the last, told her stepdaughter, Lisa Maja, to run out
and drive the geese into the barn.

Lisa Maja had no sooner stepped into the barnyard than she heard a
loud rustling noise just over her head, and almost before she had time
to blink, a flock of wild geese alighted on the ground right in front
of her. A big fine white gander was the leader; behind him walked a
gray mother goose, trailed by nine speckled goslings. The girl hardly
dared move lest she frighten them away. Very cautiously she opened the
barn door and concealed herself behind it.

The goosey-gander made straight for the barn, his family following him.
When they were all inside, Lisa Maja stole softly after to see where
they had gone. Well, the big goosey-gander had walked right into the
goose pen, and was calling and coaxing till those with him went in,
too. Then he led them up to the trough, which was full of oats and
water, and fell to feeding.

“See, this is what I’m used to,” he seemed to be saying to his family.
“This is how I have always lived ... No food worries, only to step up
to a full trough.”

Lisa Maja quietly slipped out, shutting the door after her, and hurried
back to Fru Raklitz.

“Mother dear, do come see!” she said. “The gander who flew away in the
spring has come back with a wild goose and nine little goslings.”

All her life she regretted having shut in the goosey-gander and told of
his return. Fru Raklitz, without saying a word, hunted up the little
knife which was used for killing geese, and before sundown the fine
white goosey-gander, the nice gray mother goose, and all the pretty
goslings were dead and plucked.

“It was a poor reward you gave our goosey-gander, Mother, for coming
back to us with so many nice geese,” was all she dared say.

“’Twas enough at least to make all the geese on this place understand
what happens to those who defy me and try to run away,” Fru Raklitz
retorted, a malicious smile playing round her hard mouth.




V

THE LEMMINGS


FRU RAKLITZ had been hard enough on Lisa Maja while the father was
alive; but when he died, in the year 1801, and she was in full control,
she became even more harsh and exacting. The stepdaughter was now
wholly at her mercy, without support or protection from any quarter.
The girl was but seventeen--too young and inexperienced to hold her own
with a canny old woman. She had a brother, to be sure, but he was at
Upsala University studying, so that she could not look to him for any
help.

The stepmother and she were soon at daggers’ points. Fru Raklitz wanted
her to marry the clergyman who had succeeded her father, but Lisa Maja
would not agree to that. She opposed all the arguments of the
stepmother and the parish folk, who thought the old order such an
excellent thing. The clergyman’s daughter had her own ideas about
marriage. She would not marry a man merely because he happened to be
the priest at Ämtervik; he must also be the sort she could love.

The new pastor was anxious to put the matter through. He had got into
the good graces of the stepmother, who tried to help him by any and
every means. As the girl continued to say No, Fru Raklitz one day drove
down to Öjervik to see Judge Sandelin, who was Lisa Maja’s guardian,
and have a talk with him.

It was clear that she would have the support of both the Judge and his
wife. They knew Fru Raklitz well; she had been housekeeper at Öjervik
for many years and they had always known her to be a wise and prudent
woman. Without doubt she was right, they said; the Mårbacka clergyman’s
daughter should marry the curate. Anything else was out of the
question.

Fru Raklitz was invited to stay for supper, and after the meal she and
the Judge’s wife sat talking till late in the evening. It was eleven
o’clock before she finally set off for home. But the sky was clear and
there was a moon, so that it looked as if she would have no difficulty.

And now as the chaise moved rapidly along the shore road toward Sunne,
Fru Raklitz sat thinking how she would worry and torment the poor
stepdaughter in order to break her will. Of course it was only for the
girl’s own good, she flattered herself so that she need have no
conscience in the matter.

Then, all at once, Svarten, the horse, shied with a jerk that nearly
upset the chaise. He acted as if he had the staggers; he dashed off the
road, across the ditch, and was down in a field before Long-Bengt, the
driver, could check him. When the horse was finally under control he
was all a-tremble. Without moving from the spot where he stood he
lifted his feet, one at a time, then suddenly gave a shriek such as
is seldom heard from a horse--and leaped into the air. Back on to the
road he would not go. When Long-Bengt tried to urge him on, he reared
and came near kicking the chaise to pieces.

“What is it, Bengt, what is it?” gasped Fru Raklitz, clutching the
man’s arm in her fright. “Has the horse gone mad?”

“That horse has more sense than Frua and me both,” answered Long-Bengt.
“He’s not mad, he sees something we ain’t got eyes for to see.”

Svarten nosed the ground, snorted, and backed, regardless of the chaise
and those in it. Luckily, they were in a field where the summer’s rye
had been cut, so that the ground was quite smooth and even. They
noticed that they were backing toward a broad, deep ditch; but when the
vehicle was at the very edge, the horse stopped; he probably thought he
had got past the worst danger. Though still nosing the ground and
snorting, he made no more leaps.

“You’d better get out, Frua,” said Long-Bengt, “while I try to urge him
past whatever ’tis he sees.”

Fru Raklitz unbuttoned the carriage apron and was about to set foot to
the ground, when she drew back with a cry.

“I can’t step down, Bengt,” she said.... “It’s moving!”

“I believe Frua’s as daft as the horse,” laughed Long-Bengt. “What’s
moving?”

“The ground under us is moving, the whole field is moving.” Her voice
shook and she felt a lump in her throat.

“_Asch!_” said Long-Bengt, and jumped out. He thought it was a ghost
that had frightened the horse. But ghosts were supposed to come out of
the air; he had never heard of their creeping along the ground.

And now he wasn’t long getting back into the chaise himself, nor did he
venture out of it again. What the mistress had said was true--the
ground certainly appeared to be moving. It did not tremble as in an
earthquake, nor glide away as in a landslide; but it was as if every
clod of earth in the field had taken feet and was running toward the
lake.

The two in the chaise sat gazing at the ground--and at last they saw
what it was that moved: the field was over-run by hordes of little
animals; but they were none the less frightened, the two of them. It
couldn’t be anything real or natural, they thought. Where had they come
from--all those creatures? Every spot in the field was alive with them!

The animals--or whatever they were--scurried across the ditch up on to
the road and then went rushing down an incline into the lake. Now what
sort of creatures could they be, to behave in that way? Had they been
of God’s creation there would surely have been some end to them; but
these kept coming in limitless numbers.

The horse had now become fairly calm. Only when the little animals
ran between his feet he would snort and draw back. Fru Raklitz,
meanwhile, was far from calm. Her teeth chattered from fright, and she
mumbled and talked to herself. However, she sat still as long as they
were in the field. But the horse was not going to stand out there the
whole night. He began to move on his own accord; he walked slowly,
lifting his feet and putting them down very carefully; but at least he
went forward and not backward.

The strange little animals got into the way of the horse and wagon, and
there was a grinding, crunching noise as the wheels passed over the
tiny bodies.

When Fru Raklitz heard that grinding she jumped to her feet, and began
to shriek wildly. Long-Bengt quickly caught her round the waist, to
prevent her throwing herself out of the chaise.

“They’re after me! They’re after me!” she cried. “They’re on the
wheels--they’re on the step--they’re in the wagon!”

The horse increased his speed. The chaise moved joltingly as the wheels
went over the little animals.

“They’re in the chaise, they’re in the chaise!” screamed Fru Raklitz,
springing up on to the seat. “They’re pulling at my skirt--they mean to
drag me to the lake!”

Now Long-Bengt had to stand up to hold her back. “By rights, I ought to
let you tumble into the road for your meanness,” he muttered. All the
same he kept his arm round her.

They were at last back on the road and had driven over great swarms of
the roving animals, when Svarten suddenly stopped and neighed
contentedly.

“It’s all over now,” said Long-Bengt. “Sit down, Frua.”

But Fru Raklitz went on shrieking, “They’re in the chaise; they’re
pulling at my skirt; they’ll drag me to the lake.” Long-Bengt had to
pull her down by main force and set her on the seat. She struggled so
hard he dared not let go of her.

“Go on, Svarten!” he said. “You’ll have to find the way without me
holding the reins.”

The horse set off at a trot, while Fru Raklitz, shaking and blubbering,
rambled on about their climbing the wheels and trying to get into the
chaise.

“You’ll have to run, Svarten,” said Long-Bengt, “or she’ll go clean off
her head before we get her home.”

Svarten perhaps understood. Anyhow, he must have wanted to get home to
his crib, for he took the hills up and down at top speed.

Long-Bengt sat there with beads of cold sweat standing on his forehead;
he tried to assure Fru Raklitz that the trouble was over, but she would
not believe him.

“You are very kind, Bengt,” she whimpered; “but don’t tell me we are
safe; I hear them, I see them, they are after us, and mean to drive me
into the lake.”

When they finally stopped before the front porch at Mårbacka and a maid
came out to receive her mistress, she was afraid to step down.

“No, no, not you!” she cried. “You have no power, you can’t save me
from them.”

The maid drew back in alarm. She had never heard her mistress speak
like that before.

“Go fetch the priest’s daughter,” said Fru Raklitz--“go fetch Lisa
Maja! She is the only one here who has power over the _evil ones._”

“Mamselle Lisa Maja has gone to bed,” said the girl.

“Go ask her to come down as quick as she can,” Long-Bengt put in. “Tell
her Frua got a fright on the way.”

Fru Raklitz sat shaking and gibbering until her stepdaughter appeared.

“Ah, God bless you!” cried the woman, holding out her arms to the girl.
“Come help me! Don’t be angry with me! I’ll never be mean to you
again.”

“What’s the matter, Mother dear?” said the girl as she stood by the
carriage.

“Come, give me your hand,” begged the stepmother. “Dear heart, hold
them back while I get down. Don’t let them take me! They can’t harm you
who have power over them.”

When she was out of the chaise she fell on the stepdaughter’s neck, and
sobbed: “Don’t ever leave me! Don’t be angry with me! You shall marry
whomever you will, and I’ll not say a word.”

“She saw something coming home,” Long-Bengt explained. “She saw all the
little imps of hell let loose, and she thinks they’re after her and
will drag her into the Fryken.”

The priest’s daughter put her arm round the stepmother, and said: “Come
in, Mother dear! You are at Mårbacka now. Here none of the evil ones
can touch you, darling Mother.”

Fru Raklitz was so shaken from fright that Lisa Maja had to talk to her
as to a little child, to get her to her room and to bed. She would not
let her go; so the girl had to sit there holding her hand, and listen
to her ravings until daybreak.

From that time forth Fru Raklitz never dared be cruel to her
stepdaughter; nor was she ever again her old ruthless self. She kept to
her room mostly, and let Lisa Maja run the house. She would lend a hand
when there was extra cleaning and furbishing to be done--as before a
great holiday or a party--but only in the house, never outside it. Thus
she lived until 1835. Whether she had ever any real affection for the
stepdaughter is doubtful. But when Lisa Maja was married, and the
little ones came, she grew very fond of them. Every day the children
would go in to see Granny. She was also very fond of her coffee, and
always had a fire going in the tile-stove of her room, so that she
could make coffee for herself. She would often treat the children. But
their mother thought coffee was not good for little folk, and told them
one day they must never drink any of Granny’s coffee.

The next day, when the two youngest, Nana and Lovisa, came out of the
grandmother’s room, there was a strong odour of coffee about them.

“What did you have at Granny’s to-day?” their mother asked them.

“Gruel, Mummie dear,” said the two of them as with one mouth.

“What was that gruel made in?” questioned the mother.

“In the coffeepot, Mummie dear,” they answered as if they were speaking
a piece.

They said it so nicely and they were so little and naïve, that the
mother had to laugh in spite of herself.




VI

THE NECKAN


IN THE southern part of the parish there are tracts where the landscape
is more variform and far more beautiful than up north, round Mårbacka.
There the Fryken cuts into the land in deep bays--the one after the
other--along each of which lie shore-meadows, bordered by leafy woods,
and three or four fine old peasant homesteads. Jutting out between the
bays are rocky, wood-grown headlands so wild and inhospitable that no
one would think of clearing or building there.

One summer’s day Lisa Maja Wennervik had ridden down to Bössviken,
which is the most southerly bay, to order some of the fine pears
ripening there under the protecting hills. The Bössvik folk were very
friendly, and she had dropped in at several cottages, so that it was
rather late when she left for home.

But the girl was not afraid to ride back alone in the light summer
evening. She went slowly, that she might enjoy to the full the beauty
of the night; now riding up among the hills through dense woods, where
she fancied robbers or bears might spring out at any moment and tear
her off her horse; and now down dales of dewy fields, pretty birch
groves and light, shimmering streams. There was still a pale rosy glow
in the sky, which was reflected in the lake. She had never seen
anything lovelier than that night!

All at once she saw a large, beautiful stallion grazing in the
shore-meadow of a bay. His coat was a dapple gray, his mane so long it
swept the ground, and his tail, which was thick as a rye-sheaf, also
reached to the ground. The horse was broad across the hindquarters and
high at the withers; he had a small head, with fine, clear eyes, his
legs were slender, his hoofs a silvery white that glistened like
polished metal as he lifted them in the grass. His body bore no marks
of harness or saddle.

Lisa Maja had just walked her horse, Svarten, down a hillside, and was
now going at the same slow pace toward the meadow where the stallion
grazed. She went so close to him there was but the fence between them;
by putting out her hand she could have stroked his haunches.

The stallion seemed not to have noticed them before; but now he raised
his head and looked up at the young girl. And Lisa Maja was so pretty
that the young swains would drop axe, or scythe, or whatever they had
in hand, when she came riding, and hurry down to the roadside to hang
over the fence till she had gone by.

Fancy! When the beautiful stallion raised his eyes to her, there was
the same look of admiration in his gaze that the peasant lads sent her
from the roadside.

For a moment he stood regarding her, then quickly turned and galloped
off--his mane waving in the breeze, his tail standing straight out.
Like a streak, he darted across the meadow and down the bay. Near the
shore the bay was shallow and shelving, and as he dashed through the
shallows the water splashed round him in clouds of foam. Then, all of a
sudden, he disappeared.

Lisa Maja thought the horse in his wild flight had gone beyond his
depth, and was drowning. She hoped for a second that he would come
swimming to the surface again; but no, he did not reappear. And there
was not a ripple on the water where he had gone down.

Then Lisa Maja felt a wild desire to ride to the rescue. She could not
bear the thought of letting that glorious creature drown without making
some effort to save it. With a sharp pull at the bridle, she swung her
horse round toward the fence and gave him a dig with her spurs to make
him jump it. But Svarten being the kind of horse that knows more than
most humans, instead of taking the hurdle, turned and made for home at
full gallop. The young girl from her high mount in the side-saddle had
not much control over her determined steed; she soon realized that this
time it was useless to try to make him obey. Besides, Svarten probably
knew what sort of horse it was the girl wished to rescue from the
water. By the time Lisa Maja had come to the top of the next hill and
found herself in the darkness of a dense pine wood, she, too, knew what
it was she had seen.

The silver-gray stallion with the unshodden hoofs and trailing mane she
had often heard tell of. He was none other than the Neckan--the
River-god--himself.

When the girl came home to Mårbacka and told the serving-folk of her
adventure, they all thought as she did--that she had seen the Neckan and
that herself and all on her place had best be careful, or before very
long one among them would surely be drowned.

But there is no lake near Mårbacka and the old bottom lands to the west
of the estate were by then so well dried out that not a trace of swamp
or quagmire remained. Even the river, which had once been broad and
treacherous, was now so diminished that in summertime, at least, it was
scarcely more than a shallow creek.

However, in the month of August, when the days grew shorter and the
mists hovered over river and meadow, it happened that an old man from
Mårbacka was walking homeward one evening across the western meadows;
what he may have seen or encountered down among the mists no one ever
knew--but he did not return that night. The next morning his body was
found in the little river, which was so shallow the water scarcely
covered him. He had been a crabbed old man and there was perhaps no
great mourning for him; but they were all very certain now it was the
Neckan Lisa Maja had seen that time; had she followed him into the lake
he surely would have drawn her down to his Blue Mansions in the deep.




VII

THE PAYMASTER OF THE REGIMENT


FRU RAKLITZ’S reformation may not have been so complete after all, for
the old housekeeper could never sufficiently impress upon the little
Lagerlöf children what a fortunate thing it was for Mamselle Lisa Maja
that she got so good a husband as Paymaster Daniel Lagerlöf. He was no
rich man; but wise, and kindly, and honourable he had always been. In
him she had found just the protector she needed.

To be sure he was no priest, but his father and grandfather, his
great-grandfather and great-great-grandfather had all been clergymen
and married to daughters of clergymen, so that he could claim kinship
with all the old clerical families of Värmland. Any preaching or
speech-making gift he had not inherited from his forebears, but the
tendency to guide and govern a whole community was in his blood. The
Ämtervik peasants, who at first thought ill of him because he had
married the Mårbacka parson’s daughter--thereby upsetting the old
order--soon grew accustomed to having him run the important affairs of
the parish.

The children were astonished to hear the housekeeper speak in that way
of their grandfather. They had heard stories of him which were common
among the people. He was said to have been a great violinist, and in
his youth, at least, was so moody and high-strung that the humdrum of
home life wore on him and he had to go his own ways.

But that the old housekeeper denied most emphatically. No, indeed,
there was nothing queer about the Paymaster of the Regiment. She could
not imagine who had put such ideas into the children’s heads. It was
merely that his official duties forced him to live away on journeys
most of the time. As Paymaster of the Regiment once a year he had to
travel through the whole of Värmland, to collect the war tax. And not
only was he Paymaster of the Regiment, but Manager of the Kymsberg Iron
Works, far up by the Norwegian boundary; and all at once he had to be
up and off for there. Then, too, he had such a good name that people
were always asking him to serve as executor and administrator. Most
bothersome of all had been his trusteeship for Judge Sandelin’s wife,
who had inherited seven foundries from Iron Master Antonsson. He had to
spend months on end at these various foundries, straightening out the
tangled affairs.

But as soon as ever he could get away he hurried back to Mårbacka. If
he chanced to come home some morning, unobserved, he would hunt up his
violin and stand outside the bedroom window, and awaken his wife with
music.

Now that much may have been true, perhaps; but that he ran away from
home and was gone for long periods without letting anyone know his
whereabouts--that was just something folks imagined, because ’twas
always the wife who ruled at Mårbacka.

The children were very sorry to hear that their grandfather had been
such a sober, serious, matter-of-fact person. And of course they had to
believe what the old housekeeper told them.

Then, one evening, when their parents had gone to a party, the
housemaid, who was to sit up for them, had persuaded Maja, the new
nurse, who succeeded Back-Kaisa, to keep her company. They made a fire
in the tile-stove of the nursery, drew up the children’s little red
chairs, and sat talking in whispers so as not to disturb the three
little girls, who had gone to bed.

By and by the door creaked and in walked the old housekeeper. She had
been wondering where the housemaid had betaken herself, and had been
all through the house looking for her. She, too, drew up a chair.
Anyway, she declared she’d not be able to sleep till she knew the
master and mistress were safely home.

Now that the three of them were seated by the open fire so cosy and
intimate-like, the two maids seized the opportunity to ask the old
housekeeper’s advice in a weighty matter.

“We were just saying, Lina and I, that we ought to make
dream-porridge,” said Nurse Maja; “but we don’t know as ’twould do any
good.”

In that way they tempted the old housekeeper to tell what had happened
when Lisa Maja Wennervik made a dream-pancake.

On New Year’s Eve of the last Christmas Week that Pastor Wennervik was
alive Mamselle Lisa Maja, for fun, made a dream-pancake. She had just
turned seventeen, and ’twas time for her to be thinking of marriage. So
she measured out three spoonfuls of water, three spoonfuls of meal, and
three spoonfuls of salt, and stirred them together, then she poured the
mixture on a hot griddle, ate as much of the pancake as she could get
down, and went right to bed. She must have had some difficulty getting
to sleep, though, for the salty pancake had given her an awful thirst;
and to drink anything before sleeping would break the spell.

In the morning she couldn’t remember whether she had dreamt anything.
But later in the day, on going out on the front porch, she stopped in
amazement. All at once she remembered having dreamed in the night of
standing on that very spot. Two strange men--one old, one young--had
come up to her. The older man had said he was Dean Lagerlöf of Arvika,
and that he had come with his son to ask her if she were not thirsty
and would like a drink of water. With that, the younger man had
immediately stepped forward and offered her a glass of water. And she
was very glad when she saw the clear, fresh water, for even in her
sleep her throat felt parched.

There the dream ended. But from that moment she knew who was to be her
husband; for the one who comes in the dream and offers you water when
you have eaten dream-pancake, he is the one you will marry.

Mamselle Lisa Maja wondered how this could come about, for at that time
she did not know any one by the name of Lagerlöf. But one day, soon
after New Year’s, as she was standing at the window, a sledge came up
the driveway. Suddenly she gave a cry and nipped the housekeeper by the
sleeve.

“Here comes the one I saw in the dream,” she said. “You’ll find that
his name is Lagerlöf.”

And ’twas just as she had said. The man in the sledge was Daniel
Lagerlöf, manager of the Kymsberg Iron Works, who had come to buy hay.

The first sight of him must have been a disappointment. He was not
handsome and he looked so sombre she did not see how she could ever
like him.

He stayed the night at Mårbacka. In the morning the stableboy came in
and said that a fox and two wolves had fallen into the fox-pit. None of
the men on the place seemed to know what to do to get the trapped
animals out, but the Kymsberg manager jumped into the pit with no
weapon but a knotted stick. He dealt the wolves a couple of blows on
the head, stunning them, then slipped a noose round their necks by
which to draw them up.

Mamselle Lisa Maja was so taken by the courage of the man, she quite
lost her heart to him. She vowed to herself, then and there, that him
and none other would she have for a husband.

He, on his part, had fallen in love with her at this their first
meeting, though he would not let on. He had once been engaged, it
seemed, and although the betrothed was now dead, he felt that he must
be true to her memory, and have no thought for another.

At all events, he came to Mårbacka for hay several times that winter.
He soon saw that Lisa Maja had none too easy a time of it with that
stepmother of hers. He felt sorry for her and wanted to help her. But
Lord o’ mercy! he couldn’t court her himself on account of the dear
departed. But there was his brother Elof, who was a priest somewhere up
in the Finn-forests; now he might marry her, he thought.

He brought about a meeting between his brother and Lisa Maja--which was
the worst thing he could have done. The brother fell desperately in
love with the girl, and could think of none but her for the rest of his
life; while she loved the Kymsberg manager and had no eyes for his
brother.

Pastor Lagerlöf, however, never got so far as to propose. He was
commanded by his bishop to marry a person who had lived in his home
several years, and to whom he had promised marriage. Fru Raklitz had
played a hand in that game, which ended only in misery. For when Pastor
Lagerlöf could not have Lisa Maja he took to drink, and finally
became as dissolute and worthless as he had once been noble and
high-minded.

Now Daniel Lagerlöf had no one to put forward as substitute. If he
meant to help the Mårbacka parson’s daughter he must come to the
scratch himself. Besides, he probably felt now it was better to think
of the living than to mourn for the dead. So he actually plucked up
courage enough to propose.

Mamselle Lisa Maja was very happy, and thought her troubles would soon
be over. But before very long her betrothed began to act strangely, as
if he wished to avoid her. He seldom appeared at Mårbacka now, and when
he was there he would sit silent for hours and only gaze at her, or he
would take out his violin and play from the time he came until he left.
At last a whole year went by without her seeing him.

If she asked him when they were to be married he put her off with
excuses. Once he said they must wait until he had earned enough to buy
out the other heirs to Mårbacka. Another time he had to help put his
brothers through college; and again, he thought they had better wait
and see whether he’d succeed in getting the post of Paymaster of the
Regiment.

He kept postponing and postponing. Now he had too much writing to do,
and now too much travelling--till at last no one except Mamselle Lisa
Maja herself believed they would ever be married. That made it all the
harder for her. Eligible young gentlemen from Sunne--from Ämtervik--now
came a-courting. She let them all understand they had their trouble for
nothing. But some were so persistent they came again and again, and if
she forbade them the house they would lie in wait for her at the edge
of the woods, and pop out when she appeared in the road.

All the mean things they could say of Daniel Lagerlöf they took pains
to tell her. One time she heard that he consorted with the
disreputable, besotten cavaliers who drove about the countryside
harrying homesteads, and were the terror of all decent folk; another
time she was told that he ran about in the woods like a wild animal.
Some chaffed her, saying he had now got the post of Paymaster of the
Regiment and could jolly well marry her, unless he’d grown tired of his
bargain. Others tried to weaken her by hinting that he was after the
daughter of Finn-Eric, who was reputed to be the richest man in the
country.

None of that had any effect upon Lisa Maja; she was as happy and
confident as ever that it would be as foretold in the dream.

Then one day a rumour reached her ears to the effect that her betrothed
had said if he were only released from his engagement he would go
abroad, and learn to play the violin properly.

That impressed her as nothing else had. She went down to the stable at
once to find Long-Bengt.

She said: “Now, Bengt, you must get out the chaise and drive up to
Kymsberg, to fetch the Paymaster of the Regiment; for I wish to speak
with him.”

“Ay, be sure I’ll try, Mamselle,” said Long-Bengt. “But what shall I do
if he won’t come along willingly?”

“Tell him you dare not return without him,” she said.

And Long-Bengt went.

It was a day’s journey to Kymsberg, and Long-Bengt did not get back
until the evening of the second day; but in the chaise with him was the
Paymaster of the Regiment.

Mamselle Lisa Maja received him cordially, as usual. She asked him into
the living room, and bade him sit down and rest a bit after his long
journey. They would hurry with the supper, she said, as he must be
hungry.

He paced up and down the room impatiently; he seemed only to be waiting
for the moment when he could be off.

When they were seated at table--just they two--Lisa Maja turned to him
when the housekeeper came in with the food--as if she’d only been
waiting for her--and asked him whether it was true that he wanted to
break off with her.

“Oh, yes,” he answered, looking solemn as an owl. Such was his wish, of
course; she should have guessed that long ago.

The blood rushed to her face. If she had not questioned him about this
before, she said, it was because she firmly believed they were destined
for each other. Then, with a forced laugh, he asked her what she
meant by that. She flushed crimson. Now she told him in a few words
about the dream-pancake, of how in a dream she had seen him and his
father, and what the father had said to her.

He put down his knife and fork, and stared in amazement.

“This must be something you have just made up,” he said.

“You can ask Maja Persdotter if I did not recognize you and say who you
were before you were out of the sledge, the first time you came to buy
hay,” said Mamselle Lisa Maja, turning to the housekeeper, who was then
passing round the food.

“But why haven’t you spoken of this before?” he questioned her.

“That, I think, you must understand,” she answered. “I did not wish to
hold you by any bond but your own desire.”

For a long moment he sat silent--evidently much impressed by what he
had heard. Presently he asked:

“Can you tell me how the man looked who said he was Dean Lagerlöf of
Arvika?”

“Yes,” said she, and went on to describe him. Her description of the
father must have been accurate, feature for feature, for the son was so
startled he involuntarily jumped up from the table.

“But my father died the year I was born,” he said. “You may have heard
people speak of him, perhaps?”

“I had never seen a Lagerlöf nor heard of either you or your father
before I met you in a dream. Ask Maja Persdotter standing there beside
you if she hasn’t heard me describe your father many, many times.”

He went up close to her. “If only I dared believe this!” He walked
round the room and back to her.... “Why--then _you_ were the one my
dear father meant for me, and not----”

What Mamselle Lisa Maja replied the old housekeeper never heard, for
she saw ’twas time for her to be going.

The young lovers sat talking together till far into the night,
and--well--that autumn they were married.

Mamselle Lisa Maja afterwards told the old housekeeper it was only his
morbid conscience that had stood in the way. He had felt he would be
wronging the dead sweetheart, and he had brooded over his brother Elof,
and thought he had no right to happiness when the brother was so
unhappy--and all on account of him.

But in her dream he had found something to hold to, something to be
guided by, which gave him the courage to do what he wished above
everything.

From the day of his marriage he was a changed man, though during the
first years the old despondency came over him at times; but later he
was as tranquil and even-tempered as could be. A year after the wedding
at Mårbacka his brother was drowned, and then for a while it was pretty
hard; but that, too, passed over.

The old mistress and he were married six-and-forty years, and the
last thirty years of their union all was serene; there was no happier
couple in the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

The little children lay in their beds listening and delighting. Until
then their grandfather had been to them no more than a wooden image,
and now all at once he had come alive.




VIII

THE MILITIA-MEN


IT HAPPENED in the year 1810, when Grandmother Lagerlöf was a young
wife and the mother of two little children. She sat one evening by the
east window of the kitchen-bedroom; dusk had fallen and ’twas too dark
to see to sew. Being well on in March the tallow dips were about used
up, so she had taken up her knitting, for her knitting needles she
could ply in the deepest darkness.

All at once something made her look out. She could hardly believe her
eyes! But a little while before it had been fine clear weather, and now
there was a blinding snowstorm. The air was so thick with snow she
could barely distinguish the firelight from the window of the
manservants’ hall directly opposite. The lashing wind swished the snow
against the house, and in just the short time she had been sitting
there the drifts had piled so high that bushes and fences were buried
under them.

Darkness had descended quickly with the coming of the storm, yet she
descried several large animals stalking through the drifts toward the
farmyard. “I hope the maids will be mindful, and not go out for
firewood,” she said to herself, “for the _graylegs_ are out to-night.”

Shortly afterwards she heard a piercing cry and saw a wolf lumber past
her window with something in its mouth that struggled and fought. She
thought it looked like a child. But whose child could it be? Her own
little ones were right beside her, and there were no other children on
the farm. Close behind the first wolf came another; it, too, had a
child in its gape.

Grandmother couldn’t sit still any longer. She jumped up so suddenly
she knocked over the chair, and rushed through the kitchen out into the
yard.... Then she stood stock still. Before her was the calm, beautiful
spring evening; not a sign of snow--not a wolf in sight.

She must have fallen asleep over her knitting, she thought, and been
dreaming. Yet she felt that back of it all lay something serious.

“We’ll have to take precious good care of the little ones,” she said to
the maids. “That was no dream, it was a warning.”

However, the children thrived and waxed fat and rosy. The dream, or
vision, or whatever it was, soon passed out of mind, like much else of
the same sort.

Along in August a company of poor soldiers came to Mårbacka. The men
were ragged, famished, and ill. Their bodies were nothing but
skin-and-bone and in their eyes was the look of the ravening wolf. The
mark of death was on them all.

They were from Fryksände and other parishes in the northern part of
Fryksdalen, they said. But now that they were nearing home they feared
their own people would not recognize them. Only two years before they
had gone forth as well, strong men. What would the folks at home think
of getting them back in such a state they were only fit to be put in
the ground. They had not been on the battle field, they had only
marched to and fro in cold and hunger. Their fight had been with
disease and neglect.

They were many thousand strong when they marched away, but one thousand
after another had succumbed. Great numbers had been sent out in open
barges on the raging sea in midwinter. How it had gone with those
voyagers none knew; but when the boats drifted ashore the crews sat at
their oars dead and literally encased in ice. These surviving
militia-men, now returning on their own, had often been stoned away
from farms and villages on their homeward tramp. What seemed to prey
upon them most was that they had not been sent into battle and shot to
death, but must still drag on in ceaseless misery. They knew the sort
they were--covered with vermin, reeking with filth, and horrible to
behold. They did not ask for a bed to lie on or the shelter of a roof;
they only begged a few armfuls of straw and a dry mound to rest on.

At Mårbacka the poor soldiers were not greeted with stones. The
Paymaster of the Regiment was away, but his wife gave them permission
to camp in the backyard, just inside the gates. Huge kettles of
porridge and gruel were prepared for the men, and all the clothing that
could be spared was turned over to them. The servants continually
gathered round their camp to listen to their tales of what they had
passed through. Not all could talk, however. Some were too listless to
answer when spoken to; they seemed hardly to know who they were or
where they were going.

There was great consternation and wonder over these men who had become
so changed. Reports of them spread far and wide, and people came long
distances to see them.

“That one, they tell me, is the son of Göran Persa,” said a stranger
who had stood a long while regarding the poor wretches. “But I knew
Göran Persa’s son; he was a fine lad; there’s not a feature the same.”

One day a poor widow came wandering to Mårbacka. She was from a little
backwoods croft away up north, where, in a perpetual struggle with
hunger and want, she managed to sustain life in her body.

“Is there any one among ye by the name of Börje Knutsson?” she
inquired, gazing anxiously at the sick yeomen.

No one answered. The men sat on the ground with their legs drawn up,
their chins resting on their knees. They would sit like that for hours
without moving.

“If there’s any one here named Börje Knutsson he must make himself
known,” said the widow, “for he’s my son.”

None moved or said a word, none so much as raised his eyes.

“I have wept for the lad every day since he went away,” continued the
poor woman. “If he’s there among ye why doesn’t he stand up and say so,
for I shouldn’t know him again.”

Silence.

The woman slowly went her way. To the first person she met afterwards
she related her experience.

“I thought until now I’d go out of my mind if my son did not come
back,” she said, “but now I thank my God that he’s not among those
skeletons!”

The militia-men rested a week at Mårbacka, and then went on, somewhat
strengthened.

But they had left the bloody flux in their wake. Everyone on the place
became desperately ill. All recovered save Grandmother’s two little
children, who were of too tender an age to resist the virulence of the
sickness.

When the two children lay in their coffins, Grandmother said to
herself: “If I had done like the others, if instead of harbouring those
men I had driven them away with stones, my little ones would have been
alive now.”

But as that thought crossed her mind, she remembered her vision of that
evening in the spring wherein the wolves carried off the children. “Our
Lord is not to blame,” she said. “He forewarned me.” The loss of the
children was not due to her act of mercy, but rather to her
thoughtlessness in not having taken proper precautions to guard them
against contagion.

When she realized that after all it was her own fault the children were
gone, her grief was overwhelming. “I shall never get over it,” she
said. “I can never be the same again.”

Her despair was increased by her fears for the husband--how would he
take the loss of their children? He had not been at home in several
months. The old despondency had perhaps come over him again, so that he
dared not come home. Where he was then she did not know; so could not
even send him word of what had happened. Anyway, he would surely regard
the death of his children as a visitation from God for his marrying
her, and never come back. She was not so certain but he would be right
in this. It were best perhaps they never met again.

All on the place were much concerned about her. What to do to help her
they did not know. But Long-Bengt, who was the oldest of the servitors,
was not afraid to act sometimes on his own responsibility. He set off
for Kymsberg one morning in quest of the master. This time he was not
two whole days getting back. He actually found the Paymaster of the
Regiment and stated his errand. The words were hardly out of his mouth
before the master ordered a fresh horse put to the chaise. They drove
all night without a stop, and reached Mårbacka in the morning.

Now the husband was not glum and difficult when he came. He took his
wife tenderly in his arms, dried her tears, and spoke loving words of
comfort to her. It seemed as if then for the first time, when seeing
her so crushed and sorrowful, was he able to reveal the full depth of
his love.

“And I thought I should lose you, too!” she said.

“I’m not one that grief can drive away,” said he. “Did you think I
would desert you because of your great compassion?”

In that moment she understood his heart as never before. She knew that
in peaceful and happy days she must rely on herself--which she was well
able to do; but in sorrow and suffering and times of stress he would
always be by her side--her stay and comfort.




OLD HOUSES AND OLD PEOPLE




I

THE STONE HUTS


WHEN Lieutenant Lagerlöf took over Mårbacka the buildings were mostly
very old. Oldest, however, were the manservants’ hall and the
sheep-cot, though the storehouse on stilts, which served as larder, the
stable with the loft balcony, the bath-house, where they used to smoke
bacon, and the kiln, where they malted grain, were no newcomers into
the world.

The servants’ hall and sheepfold were built of stones which had been
picked up on the ground--large and small, round and flat. The walls
were two ells in thickness, as if meant to withstand a siege. That
style of building was not of last year or the year before, so that in
the matter of age those two structures would certainly take precedence.

The first permanent residents of Mårbacka must have come from some
village where there were too many occupants in every cottage and not
enough land under cultivation to yield bread-food for all. They were no
doubt a young couple who wanted to set up a home, and saw no other way
than to fare forth into the wilds as settlers. With an eye to the good
pasturage below Åsberget, they took possession of the little huts
formerly tenanted by the _säter_ lasses. But after a time they perhaps
felt unsafe, for they had no neighbours within miles of them. Sometimes
the bear paid a visit to the cattle-shed and they themselves received
calls from rough gangs of charcoal-burners.

Under such circumstances, naturally they would have put up a couple of
stone huts--one for themselves and one for their animals. The building
for the animals was the larger; it had no windows, only narrow openings
with home-forged iron gratings, through which neither lynx nor bear
could squeeze. The floor was just hard, trampled earth, but a partition
of rough-hewn beams divided the hut into two rooms. Thus, the animals
which do not thrive together could be kept apart. Horses and sheep,
which are always friends, were on one side; cows and goats on the
other.

The stone hut they built for themselves had only one room, but it had a
floor of hand-split boards, two windows, a fireplace, and a chimney.
Along the wall opposite the windows, the settler had put up a large
bed-cupboard to hold four wide beds--two lower and two upper--in each
of which three persons could easily lie side by side. Under the windows
was a bench, and before it a large deal table. At the far end of the
room, opposite the entrance, was the fireplace.

In Lieutenant Lagerlöf’s time, this which had once been the main
building and was now the manservants’ hall, was but little changed. The
cubby-beds, the circular open fireplace, and the low, small-paned
windows with the iron gratings, were still there; but the long
board-bench and table had been replaced by a planing-bench and a chest
of tools. There were two small, round, three-legged stools which might
well have come down from the time of the first settler, likewise a worn
chopping-block that stood on the hearth.

Here lived the stableman and farmboy; here the farm labourers gathered
at rest hours to eat and lounge; hither poor belated wayfarers were
shown when they came asking for night harbour. Here Bengt, who had been
stableman in the time of the Paymaster of the Regiment, stayed on in
his old age. He had worked so long on the place that Lieutenant
Lagerlöf had recommended him as one worthy the medal for faithful
service.

There was another who was to receive this mark of honour--the old
housekeeper. She was not nearly so old as Bengt, and was still in
active service. She, who was hale and spry, could drive to church in
the family carriage and receive her medal at the chancel; while Bengt
was confined to his bed that day with the lumbago and pain in the
joints. His medal he would get in any case, but it was a grand
celebration he would be missing. It had been reported that the Dean of
Sunne would come to Ämtervik that Sunday to address the faithful
servants, and would himself place the bright silver medal round their
necks.

One can understand it was not very pleasant for Bengt to be lying there
in pain and torment while the greatest moment life could have held for
him passed him by.

Lieutenant Lagerlöf, on arriving at the church, told the Dean why Bengt
had not come. Now there was no one the Dean so loved to honour as a
faithful servant, one who had been in the same place all his life, and
had shared weal and woe with his master and mistress. So, on hearing
that Bengt was ill, he said he would drive down to Mårbacka immediately
after the service and personally present the medal to Bengt.

The Lieutenant, though pleased, felt a trifle uneasy. He slipped out of
the church as soon as he could do so with propriety, and drove home
like lightning, so as to be there a little ahead of the Dean.

Bengt was quickly washed and combed and hustled into his Sunday shirt,
his bed was spread with clean sheets, and a fancy quilt was substituted
for the old sheepskin rug. The floor was swept, the shavings under the
planing-bench were carried out, the sooty cobwebs were torn from the
ceiling, fresh juniper twigs were strewn over the floor, chopped
spruce-fir spread before the door, and a huge bundle of birch and lilac
branches was stuck in the fireplace.

The Dean of Sunne at that time was no less a personage than the
venerable Anders Fryxell, the distinguished historian and Member of
Parliament. Directly he arrived he went in to see Bengt, accompanied
by Lieutenant and Fru Lagerlöf, Mamselle Lovisa, the old housekeeper,
and all the servants. They quietly and reverently lined themselves
along the walls of the servants’ room, expecting, of course, that the
Dean would make a little speech in Bengt’s honour.

At first all went as it should go. The Dean read some passages from the
Scriptures, and Bengt listened--very still and solemn. Then the Dean
said:

“You, Bengt, have been one of those good and faithful servants of whom
our Lord speaks.”

“Ay,” says Bengt from his bed, “that’s what I’ve been.”

“You have never considered your own welfare before that of your
employer. You have always been mindful of the duties entrusted to you.”

“Ay, ’tis all so true,” says Bengt. “Many thanks to you, Dean, for
those words.”

It looked as if these constant interruptions would prove annoying to
the Dean, who was a great man, accustomed to the society of grand folk.
His was such an impressive personality that one easily became
embarrassed in his presence. He was always supreme and always had the
last word.

There had been no time for the Dean to prepare a speech, and the
address he delivered at the church was hardly suitable for the
servants’ hall. He cleared his throat once or twice, and began again.

“Bengt, you have been a good and faithful servant.”

“Indeed I have,” said Bengt.

The blood mounted to the brow of the great and brilliant Dean Fryxell.

“You must be silent, Bengt, when I am speaking,” he said.

“Ay, ay,” the old man replied. “Sure, I’m not contradicting you, Dean.
’Tis all so true what you’re saying.”

The Dean got redder and redder. Again he cleared his throat and made a
fresh attempt.

“You, Bengt, have been a good and faithful servant, but you have also
had good masters.”

The old man was so elated at this he simply could not keep still.

“You’re right, dear Dean, you’re right! They’ve been grand men, all o’
them--Wennervik and the Paymaster of the Regiment and this here Eric
Gustaf.” He reached over and put his hand on the Lieutenant’s shoulder,
then stroked him down the arm, his old face ashine with happiness.

Once more the Dean lifted up his voice.

“You must be silent, Bengt, when I’m speaking!”

“Why, of course,” said the old man. “But ’tis so right and true every
blessed word you’ve spoken, Dean.”

Now the Dean had to smile. “You’re irrepressible, Bengt. You will not
have to listen to any speech. Here is your medal. May you wear it with
health and honour for many years to come.”

So saying, the Dean went up to the bedside and laid the medal on the
bosom of the old man’s Sunday shirt.

Later, at dinner, the Dean seemed a bit abstracted. “This is the first
time in my life I have ever lost myself,” he confessed, “but in this
world one must have all sorts of experiences.”




II

THE MONEY-CHEST


BENGT, for his part, was perfectly satisfied with the Dean’s speech.
Those words about his having been a good and faithful servant, the
medal, the august presence of His Reverence in the servants’ hall, and
the whole demonstration in his honour, had had the salutary effect of
dispelling the ache in his joints and the shooting pains in his back.
In the afternoon the old man sat up in bed and related, again and
again, to all who would listen, how he had once rescued the money-chest
for the Paymaster of the Regiment.

It happened one winter when he and the master were out tax-gathering.
They had covered all the eastern districts, and before starting on the
western, the Paymaster wanted to go home for a while, as he longed for
a sight of his wife and little ones. But that of course he did not
mention to Bengt. His excuse was that the horse must be rested a couple
of days and the food-box, being empty, needed replenishing. Besides,
the money-chest was now so full he thought they’d best drive no further
until it had been emptied and the money sent on to Karlstad.

The day they turned their noses toward home there was a big blizzard.
The roads were so deep with snow they had to drive at a snail’s pace.
When they were crossing Klarälven on the ice it was already dusk.
Shortly afterward, on coming to Nordsjö Manor, the Paymaster spoke of
turning in there to ask for a night’s shelter. However, he was anxious
to get home, and as they were then within thirteen miles of Mårbacka,
he and Bengt decided to drive on. Even though it meant being out in the
sledge until ten or eleven at night, sleeping in one’s own bed was
best.

Coming into the dense forest between Nordsjö and Sandviken, they found
the road impassable. The sledge went so heavily the horse had to stop
at every step, and neither urging nor coaxing could put life into him.

“This is provoking, Bengt,” said the Paymaster. “But isn’t there a
little forest croft somewhere hereabout?”

“Ay, a bit further on is a hut,” Bengt replied; “but you can’t take in
there, Master!”

“I know what you’re thinking of, Bengt. That tavern is said to be the
haunt of ruffians and vagabonds, decent folk usually fight shy of it.
But what else can we do? We’ve been three hours getting from Nordsjö
here, and the horse is spent. We must get him under cover, where he can
rest for the night.”

“Well, Master, you do as you think best,” said Bengt.

When his man spoke in that manner, the Paymaster knew he had his own
good reasons for not wishing to put up at that place. So he decided to
make another attempt to go on.

The two then got out of the sledge and began to clear a path for the
horse, which slowly followed them. It was a heavy task. Bengt worked
hard and his master, who had on great boots that went above his knees,
a heavy wolfskin coat and thick muffler, was soon all out of breath.

“No, Bengt, my boy, this won’t do,” said he when they were almost at
the forest hut. “Now I’m as used up as the horse is. You’d better go in
and ask for house-room.”

There was nothing for Bengt to do but obey, though he thought to
himself they might better remain out in the sledge all night than
betake themselves, with the Crown’s money, into that robbers’ den. It
was plain that this would lead to trouble.

In the hut he found a man and wife sitting quietly by the fire. It
cannot be said that they were especially pleased to receive the
travellers. They made all sorts of excuses: the guest chamber was cold
and they had no bed or bedclothes suitable for a gentleman. All the
same they were persuaded. The woman brought in wood and made up a fire
in the bedroom, the man took a spade and helped Bengt clear away the
snow, so that the horse and sledge could be taken to the shed. When
Bengt went back to the sledge he found his master sitting there, sound
asleep.

“That one doesn’t guard the Crown’s money any too well, eh?” grinned
the crofter.

“Well, so far he’s never lost so much as a shilling of what’s the
Crown’s,” Bengt snapped.

Always, when they put up anywhere, the Paymaster would carry in the
money-chest and Bengt would follow with the food-box. But now, seeing
how tired his master was, Bengt said, as the sledge stood before the
wretched shed where the horse was to be stabled:

“Go in to bed, Master, and I’ll be along later with the boxes.”

“You need only bring in the one,” the Paymaster told him.

When Bengt had unharnessed the horse and led it into the shed, he found
that his master had already gone inside, and the crofter, too, had
disappeared. The strong-box was not in the sledge, and he assumed that
the master had taken it in as usual.

The Paymaster of the Regiment sat by the fire in a wretched little room
when Bengt came in. He heard him put a box down, but was too dead tired
even to turn his head.

“Lock the door, Bengt,” he said, “and take out the key.”

“’Twas not much use bringing in the empty food-box,” Bengt observed.

“That’s what I thought,” said his master. “But we’ll be able to sleep
to-night without any supper.”

Then he stretched himself out on a bare bench--great boots, fur coat,
and all--slipped a couple of sticks of wood under his head, and was
asleep in a second. He never slept later than four or five in the
morning, but this time he awoke about two o’clock, quite rested and
refreshed.

“Up, Bengt!” he called. “For God’s sake let’s be off at once, so that
we can breakfast at Mårbacka.”

There was neither lamp nor candle in the room; but the night was not
pitch-dark, and they could see well enough to grope their way out.

“You take the box, Bengt, and hitch up,” said the Paymaster, “while I
go in and settle for the lodging.”

In a few moments they drove away. The storm had abated, and though the
road was still heavy with snow, they made fair progress, now that the
horse was rested.

“After all, it wasn’t such a bad idea our stopping there over night,”
the Paymaster remarked.

“It turned out better than I expected,” said Bengt. “But I had such bad
dreams all night, and thought I heard a lot of noise. It sounded as if
they were pounding and hammering in the crofter’s room. I don’t know
yet whether they were up working or whether I was just dreaming.”

“No doubt you dreamt they stole my money-chest,” laughed the Paymaster.

“But, Master--where have you put the box?” the servant burst out,
beginning to fumble about under the seat.

“The box?... Why, you brought that out.”

“I?--I carried out the food-box.”

“But I told you last evening to bring in only the strong-box, and leave
the other.”

It must have been a terrible moment for Paymaster Lagerlöf when he
realized that through a misunderstanding on the part of his man the
money-chest had been left out in the sledge. That the crofter had
stolen it was plain. But what had he done with it? Could he have opened
it? The chest was the regulation bailiff’s strong-box, iron bound, with
combination lock. But at that, they might perhaps have pried it open.

They left the horse standing in the road, and ran back to the hut. When
they burst into the house they found four rough-looking men sitting by
the fire with the crofter and his wife, none of whom showed the least
surprise. Bengt knew the men at once for the worst desperadoes in the
district.

“Now ’tis just as I said,” the woman began, “that ye’d not be able to
get home till the snow-plow’d been run afore ye.”

“Oh, we’ll manage to get home,” said the Paymaster of the Regiment.
“But my money-chest is still in your house, and that I must have along
with me.”

“Well, well, can it be possible that ye went off and left the
money-box!” said the woman. “Then it must be standing in the bedroom.
No one’s been in there since ye left.”

“The box was not forgotten,” said the Paymaster, sternly. “So produce
it at once! You know what happens to those who steal the Crown’s money.”

“Now where could we hide a big money-chest?” the woman protested
blandly. “Ye can see for yerself what’s here, and ye’re welcome to
search the house.”

And that Bengt had already done. He had peered and poked into every
nook and corner--and had found nothing.

“If you won’t give it up willingly,” said the Paymaster, “I shall have
to leave my man here on guard while I go for the bailiff.”

“What, that fellow stay and keep guard over us!” almost laughed the
woman.

Nor was it likely that Bengt, single-handed, could have kept six
persons quietly seated in the hut while his master went in search of
the bailiff. But all this time Bengt had been puzzling over something.
He heard a crackling noise coming from the bake-oven, but saw no
evidences of dough having been prepared. Without a word, he stole up
and flung open the oven door.

“Come here, Master,” he cried, “and see the kind of bread they bake in
this here oven.”

In there on a pyre of burning wood stood the money-chest.

The crofter and his wife now sprang at Bengt, but Paymaster Lagerlöf,
who was a powerful man, pushed them back. When the other four, who had
also begun to bestir themselves, saw the kind of thrusts he could give,
they kept out of his reach. Bengt seized the oven rake and quickly
pulled the box down onto the hearth. In his eagerness to find out
whether the box had been much damaged, he nearly burned his fingers
off.

“Ha! it hasn’t been opened,” he cried exultantly.

Though the box showed that the thieves had been filing and hammering at
it, the good oaken chest was intact; neither lock nor mountings had
given way. As a last resort they had put it on the fire. But, luckily,
Bengt had been too quick for them--only a bit of one corner was
charred.




III

THE LARDER ON STILTS


ALL who had been long on the place thought the building next in age to
the stone huts was the old larder that stood on posts. It had not been
built by the first settler, but was erected some hundred years after
his time, when Mårbacka had become a regular farmstead.

The peasants then living there had hurriedly put up a post-larder, it
being the rule that every farm of any pretension must have one. It was
a crude structure. The door was so low one had to stoop to enter; but
the lock and key were conspicuously large and strong. There were no
windows, only small openings, with trap-shutters. In summer there were
fly-screens at the openings made of woven splints, through which very
little light could penetrate.

The larder had two stories. The upper story being better finished than
the lower, it was probably there the peasants stored their valuables.

In Lieutenant Lagerlöf’s time the building was as in olden days. It may
have had a new roof, perhaps, but the steps were never changed. They
were so narrow and close together one could scarcely get a foothold.
Nor was there ever a pane of glass in the old building.

In the autumn the larder was something to behold. On the lower floor
there were great bins of newly milled flour, next which stood two huge
vats packed to the brim with beef and pork in brine, then came cowls
and buckets of beef sausage, pork sausage, and potato sausage--in fact,
all sorts of things that had been made up during the autumn slaughter.
In one corner stood a barrel of salted herring, a keg of salted
whitefish and one of _sickling_, and generally a firkin of salmon.
Besides, there were tins of salted beans, salted spinach, and firkins
of green and yellow peas.

On the upper floor there were tubs of butter of the summer’s churning
stored for winter use. Long rows of cheeses were arranged on shelves
above the openings, and from the ceiling hung year-old hams. The
home-raised hops were preserved in a sack the size of a bolster, and
the malted grain in a similar one. Here were provisions for a whole
year.

It was the housekeeper who ruled over the larder. That was her domain,
and the key to it seldom got into another’s hands. Mamselle Lovisa
might potter in the pantry or milk-room, but she would hardly have
ventured into the larder. The housekeeper was also supreme in the
kitchen. Making small cakes or putting up preserves and fruit juices
might well be left to Mamselle Lovisa, but when it came to roasting a
fowl, making a cheese, or baking _knäckebröd_, it was the old
housekeeper who took charge.

The little Lagerlöf children were very fond of her, and looked up to
her as the most important member of the household. They had noticed
that whenever relatives came to visit, the first thing they did was to
go out to the kitchen and pay their respects to the housekeeper. If
anything unusual happened in the family Lieutenant Lagerlöf would
always call her in and tell her about it, and when Daniel and Johan
were returning to school after the Christmas and summer holidays, they
were told to say good-bye to the housekeeper. They had also heard
outsiders say that Fru Lagerlöf was in great luck to have such a
treasure in her kitchen, that nothing was ever wasted under her
watchful eye. They said, moreover, that nowhere else could one get such
Christmas ale, such _knäckebröd_, and such tasty dishes as were set
before you at Mårbacka. And it was all due to the old housekeeper, they
declared. So it was not strange the children regarded her as the main
prop of the home, and firmly believed that were she not there Mårbacka
would collapse.

Then, one day, little Anna found out a great secret, which gave her an
awful fright, and she confided it to her sister Selma. She had
overheard two of the maids talking about the housekeeper; they had said
she was married and had a husband.

The distress of the two little girls was indescribable. If the
housekeeper were actually married and had a husband they could not be
sure of keeping her at Mårbacka. What would their mother do without
her? And what would they themselves do who got such nice titbits from
her whenever they went into the kitchen? And what would happen to the
whole place, they wondered?

It was most imperative, therefore, that they should know how the matter
stood; so they asked Nurse Maja if it were true that the housekeeper
was married and had a husband.

Oh, yes. Nurse Maja knew the whole story. She had heard it from her
mother, who was in service at Mårbacka at the time it all happened.

“It is the truth and no lie,” said she. The housekeeper’s husband was
living in Karlstad, and was a boss carpenter. There was no such luck as
his being dead!

And this was how it came about: When Lieutenant Lagerlöf and his
brother as lads attended school at Karlstad, their mother, the old
mistress, had sent her trusted housekeeper along with the boys, to look
after them and prepare their meals. While there, she had made the
acquaintance of a carpenter, who proposed to her. When on her return to
Mårbacka in the spring she announced that she was going to be married,
the old mistress was both sad and alarmed at the thought of losing her
“greatest treasure.”

“And what sort of fellow are you marrying?” she had asked her. “Do you
know whether he is a good man?”

Oh, yes, she was certain of that. He was a boss carpenter, who had his
own shop and his own home. The house was in order, so that she might be
married at once, and she could never have found a better husband.

“But how can you be content to live the year round in a barren city
street--you who have always lived in the country?” the old mistress had
then said.

Oh, she had no fears as to that. All would be well for her hereafter.
She was to have an easy life--no baking, no brewing; she had only to go
to the market and bring home whatever was needed.

When the old mistress heard her housekeeper speak in that manner she
knew the woman was bent on marriage, and there was nothing to be done
but give her a wedding at Mårbacka.

The bridegroom appeared to be a clever, sensible sort, and the day
after the wedding he took his bride to Karlstad.

One evening a fortnight later--no, it was hardly that long--as the old
mistress went out to the larder to slice some ham for supper (she could
never take up the key to the larder but she thought of Maja Persdotter
and wondered how she was getting along), she said to herself: “If I had
not sent her to Karlstad she would never have met that carpenter and I
should still have my good helper, and wouldn’t have to run out to the
larder twenty times a day, as I do now.” Suddenly she saw a figure
coming through the birch grove that was the living image of her
housekeeper. The nearer the figure approached the more certain was
Grandmother Lagerlöf of what she beheld. When Maja Persdotter presently
stood before her and said, “Good-evening, Frua,” she had to believe her
eyes and ears.

“Well, well, is it you, Maja Persdotter!” she exclaimed. “But what
brings you here? Haven’t you got a good husband?”

“All he does is drink,” declared the housekeeper. “He’s been drunk
every day since the wedding. It’s the pure alcohol he should be using
in his work he guzzles. I can’t put up any longer with such a swine.”

“But I thought you were to go to the market and buy all your
provisions, in order to escape hard work?”

“I’ll work my fingers to the bone for Frua and the children if you’ll
only take me back!” vowed the housekeeper. “I’ve wished myself back at
Mårbacka day and night since I went away.”

“Come in, then, and we’ll talk this over with the Paymaster of the
Regiment,” the old mistress said with tears of joy in her eyes. “God
willing, we’ll never part again so long as we live,” she added.

Nor did they. The housekeeper’s husband probably knew it would be
useless for him to try to get her back. At all events, he never came to
fetch her. The wedding ring she removed from her finger and laid away
in her trunk. Nothing more was said about that episode in her life.

Lieutenant Lagerlöf’s little daughters should have felt quite easy
in their minds on hearing this; but for a long time afterward they were
troubled. Since that carpenter was still alive he might come some day
and take her away. Whenever they looked down the road they expected to
see him coming. Nurse Maja had told them that if he came and demanded
the return of his wife, she would have to go with him.

They did not know just how old the housekeeper was. She herself had
forgotten the year of her birth, and the date set down in the parish
register was said not to be authentic. She must have been over seventy;
but for all that, the carpenter might want her back--fine, capable
woman that she was.

Then what would happen to Mårbacka!




IV

THE MANSERVANTS’ COTTAGE


IN OLDEN times, when the master had to furnish the clothing for all the
servants on his place, the womenfolk must have had their hands full of
work the year round. Through the long, dark winter mornings and the
long, dark winter evenings, they sat at the spinning wheels drawing out
the threads for warp and weft. But the weaving itself was not begun
until the spring, when the days grew longer; for such work cannot be
done in semi-darkness.

In order to get the coarse wadmal and fine woollen cloth, the linen and
cotton webs finished by summer, when the parish tailor came, they had
to put speed into the looms. But if a loom stood in the kitchen the
work did not go very fast. The weavers should have a place to
themselves, where they can work without interruptions. Therefore, in
former days every well-conducted farmstead had its special loom-room,
and, of course, Mårbacka had one also. This was from the time of the
clergymen. They had added a story to the manservants’ cottage
consisting of two rooms, with clay-coated walls and boarded ceilings;
and in each was a tile-stove. The back room was occupied by the farm
overseer; and in the front room stood two looms, one at either window.

The loom-room was in use even in Lieutenant Lagerlöf’s time, though it
was then no longer the custom to pay one’s serving-folk their earnings
in clothing but in money. It was Fru Lagerlöf’s great delight to sit at
a loom weaving towelling, bed linen, table linen, floor mats, curtains,
furniture coverings, and dress fabrics--in fact, everything of that
sort needed in the home. All summer long she had her looms going.

In the autumn, however, the looms were taken out to make room for a
long, low table which was well smeared with bezum, and the round,
three-legged stools were brought up from the servants’ room. That meant
that Soldier Svens, the parish shoemaker, was expected. Soon he and his
apprentices came shouldering great knapsacks packed full of awls,
hammers, bundles of lasts, wax-ends, eyelets, heel-irons and shoe-pegs,
all of which were dumped upon the table.

The cobbler was a tall, gaunt man with a shock of black hair and a full
black beard. Seeing him for the first time one thought him a fierce and
dangerous fellow, more fit for fighting than for the shoemaker’s bench.
But when he spoke, it was in a soft, timorous voice. His eyes were
rather small and mild-looking, and his whole bearing was a bit
uncertain. He was perhaps not so very dangerous after all.

Lieutenant Lagerlöf’s little children were in high glee when the
shoemaker arrived. They bounded up the difficult stairs to the
loom-room many times a day. It was not so much for chatter they
came--for Soldier Svens was a reticent and diligent man--as to watch the
work, to see how a shoe was made, from the stretching of the leather on
the last to the cutting out of the bootlaces.

The shoemaker, who usually sat with drooping head, brightened when he
heard Lieutenant Lagerlöf’s footstep on the stairs. He and the
Lieutenant were old regiment comrades. After they had discussed
brogans, sole-leather, and boot-grease a while, they fell to
reminiscing about Trossnäs Field, and when they were well warmed up to
it, the Lieutenant would coax the shoemaker to sing an old war song
which was unlike any other battle hymn in that it began thus: _We
heroes from Sweden, we do not love to fight._ That song the soldiers
had made up when they marched down to Denmark in the year 1848 on the
expedition known as the “Sandwich War.”

Singularly enough, Shoemaker Svens loved to talk about Tailor Lager,
who had sat many a time in that very room in the days of the Paymaster
of the Regiment, and who was as merry and full of fun as he was grave
and mournful.

“You have probably heard, Lieutenant, how the tailor came to be called
Lager,” the shoemaker began.

The Lieutenant knew the story as well as he knew his “Our Father,” but
all the same he replied:

“I may have heard it, Svens, but you tell it--in your way.”

“Well, you see, Lager he was a soldier like myself, though he was
before my time. They say in the regiment that at first he was called
Lars Andersson. Then came orders for the privates to change their names
because there were too many Anderssons and Johanssons in the regiment.

“One day at a rally at Trossnäs, the soldiers were called in by your
father to say by what name they wished to be known, and to have it set
down in the roll.

“Of course Lars Andersson was among them. The Paymaster of the Regiment
knew him from of old as a joke-maker, for year after year Lars had sat
here at Mårbacka weeks at a stretch, making clothes for the Paymaster
and all his folks. From the time he came till he went it was nothing
but fun and laughter. He could mimic everybody in the parish and make
things disappear like a magician at the fair, and he played on a stick
till you thought you heard the whole regiment marching. But he was a
bit dangerous, was Lars, for he made up yarns about folk that caused
bad feeling among the neighbours.

“‘Well, what shall you call yourself, Lars Andersson?’ the Paymaster
asked him, putting on a stern face so that Lars would not dare come
with any of his monkey tricks.

“‘Lord preserve the Paymaster of the Regiment!’ says he. ‘May I call
myself anything I like?’ He puckered his forehead as if he were trying
hard to think of a name.

“‘You may, Lars Andersson.’ The Paymaster, knowing his man, added, ‘But
it must be a proper and honourable name, and nothing clownish.’

“You remember, Lieutenant, how your father looked. He was a kind man,
but just the sight of him put fear into many a one, for he was a big
tall man with bushy black eyebrows.

“But the tailor was not afraid--not he! ‘Then,’ says he, ‘I’ll call
myself Lagerlöf, for that is both an honourable and respected name. I
know of no other in all Värmland that sounds so sweet.’

“The Paymaster of the Regiment must have got hot in the head when he
heard that that buffoon wanted to call himself Lagerlöf.

“‘No, that won’t do,’ he said. ‘We can’t have two with the same name in
the regiment.’

“‘But,’ says the tailor, ‘there are at least three Ugglas and four
Lilliehööks, and it isn’t likely anyone would mistake me for the
Paymaster.’

“‘No. But can’t you see, Lars Andersson, that it would never do,’
protested the Paymaster.

“‘I wouldn’t have chosen that name if you hadn’t given me leave to call
myself whatever I wished.’ The tailor made himself appear very humble
and serious. ‘I know that when the Paymaster of the Regiment gives you
his word you can usually go by it.’

“Then there was a long silence. Paymaster Lagerlöf sat studying how
he’d get round this. Aside from the fact that it would make him the
butt of the regiment, he didn’t care to have a mountebank like that
tailor knocking about under the name of Lagerlöf.

“‘Look here, Lars,’ he finally said, ‘it might do well enough here in
the regiment for us two to bear the same name, but home at Mårbacka it
would never go. So understand, if you insist on this thing you can’t do
any more tailoring there.’

“That must have given the tailor a scare, for the weeks he sat sewing
at Mårbacka were to him the best in the whole year. At no other place
did he fare so well, and nowhere else did they laugh so heartily at his
yarns and pranks.

“‘Perhaps you’d be satisfied to call yourself Lager?’ the Paymaster
suggested, seeing the fellow was wavering. The tailor must have agreed
to that, for he went by the name of Lager the rest of his life.”




V

THE “JUNGFRU”


SHE was an old _jungfru_ who had once been in service in the home of
Fru Lagerlöf’s parents, at Filipstad, but lived now, in her old age, at
Ämtervik. She had known Fru Lagerlöf as a child, and used to come to
Mårbacka two or three times a year to see the folks.

The _jungfru_ was a tall, good-looking woman with white hair. She had a
strong nose, a firm mouth, and a grave manner. She liked preachers and
missionaries, and ran to prayer-meetings and sewing-circles. One could
not talk with her about dancing, or novels, or love affairs; such
things were to her an abomination. Nor did one dare speak ill of any
one in her presence, or even discuss pretty clothes, and she would not
hear about the sinful things that went on in the world.

It was not easy to know just what one should talk about. Outside of
cookery and the weather there were few topics of conversation one might
safely touch upon. These, to be sure, held out a long while, but even
they could become exhausted, for the _jungfru_ was a person of few
words, and her answers were short and well posed.

There was a way, however, to loosen the _jungfru’s_ tongue; but it had
its drawbacks. She had once on a time been cook at a large deanery. The
dean had twenty children, all living and arrived at maturity. That
family she continually kept in mind, and her supreme delight was to
talk about those people.

The family at Mårbacka were having their usual afternoon coffee in the
living room. The coffeepot and tray stood on the big table. Everyone,
in turn, went up and poured himself a cup. None took more than one lump
of sugar, one wheaten rusk and one of rye, one ring-biscuit, one ginger
cookie, and a bit of fresh cake, if there happened to be any. Whereupon
each sat down in his accustomed place. Fru Lagerlöf occupied one corner
of the sofa, Mamselle Lovisa the other. The Lieutenant always had the
rocker, which was his favourite seat. No one else would have ventured
to appropriate that. Herr Tyberg, Johan’s tutor, took a cane-bottomed
chair, and between these four stood a table made from the root of an
alder. At one of the little window-tables sat Johan, at the other Anna,
while over in the chimney corner, by the folded card table, sat the two
little tots, Selma and Gerda; they were considered too young to have
coffee, and had to be content with a glass of milk each.

The _jungfru_, who had come that day for a visit, was having coffee
with the family. She had placed her chair in the middle of the room,
where all might see and talk with her. They had run the whole gamut of
harmless topics, and were now at a standstill. Lieutenant Lagerlöf, who
could not abide a lull in the conversation, began to question her about
missions, colporteurs, sewing-circles, and prayer-meetings. Knowing the
sort he was and what she was, it was clear that this could not run
smoothly.

Fru Lagerlöf tried to change the conversation, Mamselle Lovisa gave her
brother a nudge with her elbow, and Herr Tyberg called attention to the
excellent quality of the coffee. But the Lieutenant and the _jungfru_
went right on with their discussion, which was getting a bit hot.

Now Fru Lagerlöf knew from of old that if the _jungfru_ took offence at
anything the Lieutenant said about the “miss-i-on,” she would not come
again for at least a year; and her circumstances were such that she
needed to come to Mårbacka occasionally, to get a few good meals, a
sack of flour, and something tasty to take home with her. She saw no
way out of it but to ask the _jungfru_ what had become of all the
dean’s twenty children.

In a twinkling the foreign and home missions, the heathen children, and
even the impious Lieutenant were forgotten. She brightened, and
promptly started in:

“I’ve never known the like of it in all my life. In that house we’d a
wash-day every other week, and at that, the tubs were always full of
clothes. You could never sit down to a meal but you must have a child
on each side of you. You had to fix its food and help feed it in the
bargain. When there was shifts to be made, they had to fetch home whole
bolts of linen, and sempstresses and tailors and shoemakers never found
time to go to other places in the parish, for they’d enough to do in
that one place.”

“But, my dear Jungfru Anna, however could the dean and his wife manage
to bring up so many children?” Fru Lagerlöf said to get her well
started.

“Ah, but they did, though, and they turned out grand, all of them. You
never saw better children. Only think! the oldest daughter, Eve--what a
handy one she was at making baby things and tending little ones! And
she got married, indeed, at seventeen to Curate Jansson of Skilanda,
and when he died she got a dean in Västergötland. She had a lot of
children, and after she’d stood a bride the first time she never showed
herself again in her father’s house.”

“She probably thought there were enough without her,” observed the
Lieutenant, dryly.

The little girls over in the chimney-corner began to giggle; but they
got such a sharp look from the _jungfru_ they subsided instantly.

“The next to the oldest was a boy named Adam,” the _jungfru_ continued.
“He was the worst child for crying I ever came across. But later on,
when he became a priest, he chanted the service so beautiful that he
was made Court Chaplain. He could have married any one he liked, but he
had no such wish. For some reason he remained a bachelor all his life.”

“Tell us, what was it?” Herr Tyberg struck in.

Again came a titter from the chimney-corner. The _jungfru_ shot the
children and Herr Tyberg each a glance that scared them into silence.

“The third was a boy called Noah. And d’you know, _Frua_, he was so
good at fishing, and brought home such big catches that both me and his
mother was thankful to him. He became a priest in Halland, and every
year he sent his folks a big barrel of salted salmon.”

“Oh, speaking of salmon----” The Lieutenant started to say something
about their ordering another firkin of salmon, but couldn’t get a word
in for the _jungfru._

“The next was a boy named Shem,” she rattled on. “He was as great a
hunter as Noah was a fisher. Oh, you’d ought t’ve seen all the grouse
and hares he brought home! And he became a priest, too, and got a
vicarage down in Skåne; and every winter he sent home a reindeer he’d
shot himself.”

After Shem she took breath and looked round. Her hearers sat silent and
subdued. None thought of interrupting her.

“The one that came after the three boys was a girl whose name was Sara.
And I’d be willing to swear before God and man, that never have I seen
any one with such a knack at putting up pickles and making jam and
fruit juice. All the same, she didn’t get married; she went to
Stockholm and kept house for her brother the Court Chaplain.

“The next was also a girl, and Rebecca was her name. I must say that
she was the one who understood me the least. She had such a good head
for learning she could have been a priest like her brothers. And the
way she could make up poetry was something wonderful! Folks said there
was nobody in all Sweden beat her writing cradle songs. Just the same
she got married, but ’twas only to a school teacher.”

At that point the _jungfru_ was interrupted by the maid coming in with
fresh coffee, and they must all have a second cup.

“I wonder if there was any one in that batch who could make a decent
cup of coffee?” Lieutenant Lagerlöf ventured.

“The Lieutenant takes the words out of my mouth!” exclaimed the
_jungfru._ “It may sound queer, but the one who had a real turn for
cooking was the fourth boy, Isaac. He was so clever at whipping up a
sauce and basting a roast that one could have right good help from him
round the stove.”

“He must have excelled, though, at preparing baby-food,” Herr Tyberg
observed.

Snickers went up not only from the chimney-corner, but from all parts
of the room. Fru Lagerlöf, however, kept a straight face.

“What a wonderful memory Jungfru Anna must have to be able to remember
all that!” she said, so as to keep the old girl in good humour.

Ordinarily the _jungfru_ was quick to take offence, but not when she
could talk about her dear deanery children. Then she was imperturbable.
At all events, Herr Tyberg had helped them away from Isaac. They never
learned to what uses he eventually put his talent.

“The two next were twins, and they were called Jacob and Esau. They
were as like as two coffee beans. I couldn’t tell one from t’other. I
never saw such boys for running and jumping and skating. But they
became priests, they, too.”

“I thought they were going to be rope-dancers,” the Lieutenant cut in.

“They became priests, they, too,” the _jungfru_ reiterated, not in the
least put out. “Esau went up to Jämtland, where he had to clamber ’mong
the fells, and Jacob, he went down to Bohuslän, where he scrambled in
and out of boats and ships. They found their right places and turned to
use the talents God had given ’em--they, like their brothers and
sisters.”

“But what happened to Joseph?” asked the Lieutenant quickly.

“There were two girls before him, Lieutenant, called Rachel and Leah.
They were handy in the garden; the one planted and the other weeded.
When the bishop paid a visit he declared he’d never tasted such peas
and such strawberries. They married, too; each of them got a foundry
owner. And now I’m coming to Joseph.”

“He became a squire, I suppose?” said the Lieutenant.

“He became a tenant of his father’s,” the _jungfru_ corrected him. “He
looked after the fields and tended the cows and provided food for his
parents and his brethren.”

“H’m--that was just what I thought.” So saying, the Lieutenant arose
and sidled toward the door, where his hat and cane were hanging, and
sneaked out.

“The thirteenth was David,” pursued the _jungfru._ “He married three
times, and had three children by each wife. If it please you, I can
tell you the names of all the wives and children.... But maybe ’twould
be better to keep to the twenty brethren?”

They all thought that quite the wisest plan. But with these prospects
before her, Fru Lagerlöf felt a bit uneasy.

“I’ll run out and fetch something to work on,” she said, “then I’ll be
able to follow you better.” But it was a good while before she came
back with that work.

“The fourteenth was a girl named Deborah. She was always so nice about
giving me a hand with the bread-making. She never got married and never
left home, for she had to stay at the deanery and help me and her
mother with the little ones. Sometimes she was kind of queer, though,
and then she’d say she liked the Catholic religion because it didn’t
allow its priests to marry.”

A slight noise was heard down by the door. Herr Tyberg had slipped out
so softly no one noticed it till he was gone.

“The fifteenth was a girl, and her name was Martha. She was the
greatest beauty you ever set eyes on! But she, too, was a bit queer.
When she came seventeen she married a dean who was two-and-sixty, just
because she wanted to get away from home.”

Here Anna and Johan stood up. They must go fetch a light, they said. It
was some little time before that light was brought.

“The sixteenth was called Mary. She was homely, and she used to say
she’d never be able to catch a parson or a gentleman; but she was that
eager to leave home she took up with a farm-hand, and went off and got
married.”

Mamselle Lovisa remained faithfully at her post, where she had gone
sound asleep; but this the _jungfru_ had not noticed.

“The seventeenth was hardly eighteen when she moved away from the
deanery. She used to help the missus write letters to all the brothers
and sisters; for that was more than any one body could do.”

The door opened ever so little and shut again.

“The eighteenth,” droned the _jungfru_, “was but fifteen when he
declared he was going to America because he couldn’t put up with so
many relatives.

“And number nineteen and twenty, they were only fourteen and thirteen
when I last saw them.”

At that moment Fru Lagerlöf came in with her knitting, Anna appeared
with the lamp, and Mamselle Lovisa awoke.

“Thanks, thanks, dear Jungfru Anna,” said Fru Lagerlöf. “We shall never
forget this. It has been so very instructive to me and my children.”




VI

THE BRIDAL-CROWN


MAMSELLE LOVISA LAGERLÖF used to dress the brides. Not all the girls in
the parish who married came to her to be decked, only the daughters of
the best peasant families. Some years there were two or three brides,
and some none at all.

Formerly, when Mårbacka was a parsonage, it had been the duty of the
pastor’s womenfolk to deck the brides, especially those who were to be
married in the church.

Mamselle Lovisa’s mother and maternal grandmother and great-grandmother
before her had performed this same service. It was an old custom which
had been handed down.

She had inherited all the old bridal trumpery which in the course of
time had accumulated at Mårbacka. She had a large old cupboard, in a
drawer of which were treasured long strings of glass, coral, and amber
beads, a collection of tortoise-shell combs that stood up eight inches
from the head, and half-round pasteboard forms, covered either with
stiff white satin or hand-painted flowers, in use at the period when
coifs were worn. She had also a high pasteboard bridal-crown, the
points of which were covered partly with gilt paper and partly with
pink-and-green taffeta. There were wreaths of artificial roses and
yards on yards of green satin ribbon sewn with flowers of pink satin.
In the same drawer there were Jenny-Lind-ringlets, to be fastened on so
as to fall against the face, hair pins with dangle-buttons, long
ear-pendants of imitation pearls, an assortment of brass brooches,
bracelets, and shoe buckles set with glass rubies, amethysts, and
sapphires.

In the days when these things were in vogue it was a responsible and
laborious task to deck a bride. For days before the wedding the bride
dresser had to sit sewing flowered satin bands round the skirt and
sleeves of the wedding dress. Sometimes the crown had to have fresh
gilt paper and there were paper flowers to be made, and all the brass
things had to be polished till they shone like gold.

Though all the gewgaws were shoddy stuff, a peasant-bride with a high
crown and a broad flower wreath on her head, with strand on strand of
multi-colored beads hanging down from her neck, with flowered satin
sash round her waist, with a band of gay ribbon bordering her skirt,
with bangled wrists and buckled shoes, must have been the most dazzling
sight one could behold.

And it was also the most becoming array for a tall, bright-eyed,
rosy-cheeked peasant lass, whose figure had been developed by hard toil
and whose skin was tanned by sun and wind. Thus arrayed, she carried
herself with dignity and pride, as if for a space she were exalted
above her kind. To the bridegroom on the wedding day she looked a
queen, a veritable goddess of riches. She was the most gorgeous flower
in all the meadow, and to his eyes she glittered like a jewelled casket.

When Mamselle Lovisa dressed brides the old frippery was no longer in
use. Now it had to be a natty little crown of myrtle, a thin wreath,
also of myrtle, and a long white veil. Sometimes she would put a band
of red satin ribbon round the waist of a plain black dress, and lend
her brides her own gold brooch, gold bracelets, and watch and chain, to
relieve at least a little the severity of the attire.

She must indeed have sighed for the olden times, and felt that
something was lost by being so sparing with colours and ornaments, by
concealing the rugged, and sometimes rather coarse, features of the
peasant brides behind a sheer, white veil. That mode suited better the
pale delicate city maiden, who wished to appear before the bridegroom
as something ethereal and dreamlike. She conceded that this, too, was a
pretty fashion; but certainly the peasant brides would have looked much
better in the old, characteristic array.

Besides, it was difficult to procure fresh myrtle for the wreath and
crown. Mamselle Lovisa tried to raise a little myrtle herself, but
somehow it never seemed to grow for her, and the brides rarely had any
to help out with.

Once Mamselle Lovisa got into trouble. A middle-aged woman, one Kaisa
Nilsdotter, came and asked her if she would not dress her as bride. The
woman was of the poorer peasant class, while the prospective husband
was a schoolmaster. She felt that since she was making such an
advantageous marriage no less a person than Mamselle Lagerlöf should
deck her. And Mamselle Lovisa was quite willing. All she asked was that
the bride should help her find the myrtle.

“I am nearly out of myrtle,” she said, “and do not know where to
procure any.”

The woman agreed to furnish the myrtle for both crown and wreath. The
day before the wedding she sent a few twigs with leaves so blackened
and damaged they could hardly be used for a bridal-crown.

Here was a dilemma! Mamselle Lovisa stripped her own myrtles of every
bit of green; but this did not go very far. The maids ran over to see
what they could find on the neighbouring farms, and came back with only
a few poor sprigs. All the myrtle seemed to be sick that year; the
leaves were black, and dropped off if one but touched them.

It would never do to bind any green but myrtle into a bridal-crown.
Nice, fresh whortleberry is very like myrtle; but to wear a
bridal-crown of whortleberry green would be a terrible disgrace. The
bride might actually think she was not properly married.

Mamselle Lovisa laid the miserable little twigs in water to freshen
them a bit, and worked far into the night on the wreath and crown. It
looked a hopeless task, but she made the best of it. In the morning she
quietly slipped out to the woods, but returned as she had gone--empty
handed. Passing through the kitchen to her room she averred that never
had she had such difficulty trying to bind a pretty bridal-crown. The
maids felt sorry for her, and offered to run to still other cottages to
beg myrtle.

“No, thank you,” she said, “it’s too late now. The bride and groom may
be here at any moment.”

She went into her room and stuck a few more leaves into the crown and
wreath where they were the barest, then showed her work to the
housekeeper and the maids.

“How in the world did you do it, Mamselle Lovisa!” one exclaimed. “Why,
that wreath and crown are just as pretty as those you usually make,
though ’twas mostly bare sprigs and black leaves you had.”

Mamselle Lovisa then explained that she had freshened the leaves in
water, it was only smoke and dust that had blackened them.

Shortly afterwards the bridal pair arrived. The bride was decked in
Mamselle Lovisa’s room. Though no longer young, the woman had a good
and pleasing appearance. When she was all ready Mamselle Lovisa
conducted her into the parlour, that she might view herself in the
large mirror. And she was delighted.

“I never would have thought I could look that well!” she said. Then
she took out a bottle of cologne and a pretty box--gifts from the
groom. The box was filled with small candies, loaf-sugar, raisins, and
lozenges. These she passed round--first to Mamselle Lovisa, then to the
others. All had to dab themselves with a few drops of the cologne and
take a piece of candy or a raisin from the box. She looked more pleased
and happy than the young brides usually did, and every one complimented
her on her appearance.

In a few moments she and the bridegroom drove off to the parsonage to
be married, and from there to the bride’s home, to celebrate.

For a time Kaisa Nilsdotter was very happy in her married life.
Although her husband was much older than she, her respect for his
learning was so great that she took special pride in ministering to his
comfort and in making him a pleasant home. Then a rumour got afloat. It
must have been started by some person at Mårbacka; but who the author
was none could say. At all events, it travelled round the whole parish.
At last some kind friend no doubt whispered it into the ear of Kaisa
Nilsdotter.

“Mamselle Lovisa Lagerlöf bound your bridal-crown with whortleberry
green.”

At first she would not believe it. Such a thing was beyond credence.
But after a while she began to think back. Her bridal-crown had been as
pretty as anyone else’s. It had looked so fresh and green on her head.
She remembered how proud she had been because a fine Mamselle had put
it on her. But was the crown not much too green? The spring she
was married the myrtle had all been poor, she remembered, for she had
tried in vain to find some green sprays. Maybe Mamselle Lovisa had
thought it was not necessary to be so very particular with one who came
of such humble folk? She would never have dared offer a crown of
whortleberry to the daughter of a squire.

She brooded over this and talked with her husband about it. She
wondered whether they were really married, in case it was true that her
crown had been of whortleberry green.

The husband tried to reason with her, but she wept and was utterly
wretched, thinking herself disgraced and humiliated. Mamselle Lovisa
had thought she was not fine enough to be dressed by her, so she had
made her a crown of whortleberry, and now she and all the parish were
laughing at her. Her husband finally advised her to go to Mårbacka and
ask Mamselle Lovisa herself about it.

She chanced to come at a most inopportune time. There was a grand party
that day at Mårbacka, and when she stepped into the kitchen the maids
were too busy to give her more than a short how-do-you-do. She asked
for Mamselle Lovisa, who was inside with her guests, and they would not
call her out. She would have to excuse them, too, for there was such a
lot of company to serve. But, if she liked, she might step into
Mamselle Lovisa’s room, and wait there for her; which she did.

It was here the crown had been placed on her head. She remembered how
happy she was that day, and now it was hard to believe there had been
any deception.

Presently two maids passed through the room, each carrying a tray of
filled wine glasses. They left the door ajar so that she could see into
the dining room and parlour, which were full of people. It was indeed a
big party, she thought. In there were not only the gentry of Ämtervik,
but the Dean’s and the Doctor’s folk from Sunne and Pastor Hammargren
of Karlstad--the husband of Mamselle Lovisa’s sister. Feeling rather
embarrassed, she went to shut the door, when she caught a few words
that made her stop and listen.

Lieutenant Lagerlöf, with wine glass in hand, stood in the middle of
the floor announcing the betrothal of his sister Lovisa to Pastor
Milén, the clergyman at Ämtervik.

Then there was much toasting and congratulating. Everyone looked happy
and pleased, which was not surprising. Mamselle Lovisa was a woman of
forty, and her relatives had hardly expected that she would marry.
Pastor Milén was a widower with four small children who needed a
mother’s care. It was all so right and fitting.

Kaisa Nilsdotter had heard that when Mamselle Lovisa was young she
would not marry because she had not the heart to leave her parents. But
now that they were dead she wanted a home of her own. She had also
heard that Mamselle Lovisa did not care to go far from Mårbacka, and,
happily, the parsonage was but five minutes’ walk from there.

It sort of cut into Kaisa Nilsdotter that everything should go so well
for Mamselle Lovisa--she who had made a whortleberry crown for her.
Stepping back from the doorway, she saw the old housekeeper, who had
come in to hear the betrothal announcement, standing just behind her.
Kaisa Nilsdotter laid a heavy hand on the housekeeper’s shoulder.

“I came here to find out whether Mamselle Lovisa made my bridal-crown
of whortleberry green,” she said. “But maybe ’twouldn’t do to ask her
about it on a day like this?”

The housekeeper was rather startled, but she was not one to be easily
thrown off her guard.

“How can you say anything so idiotic, Kaisa!” she flouted. “Everyone in
the house knows what a lot of bother Mamselle Lovisa had with your
bridal-crown. We all ran about to every cottage around here, and begged
the myrtle.”

Kaisa stared at her as if searching her very soul to get at the truth.
“But the whole parish says so,” she declared.

The old housekeeper, whose sole thought was to pacify the woman and get
her out of the house, lest she disturb Mamselle Lovisa on this of all
days, said:

“But I tell you, Kaisa, that as sure as Mamselle Lovisa’s own
bridal-crown will be of myrtle was yours of myrtle, and of nothing
else.”

“I’ll bear those words in mind,” said Kaisa. “And when I see what
Mamselle Lovisa’s bridal-crown is bound with, then I’ll know how it was
with mine.”

“You can rest easy as to that,” the housekeeper assured her.

The two then went into the kitchen, and Kaisa, looking quite calm now,
put out her hand in farewell.

“I may as well be going,” she said. “Anyhow, I don’t suppose I could
see Mamselle Lovisa to-day to speak to.”

With that she was off. The housekeeper went back to her work, and, in
the rush and excitement, forgot about the woman. It was not till a day
or two afterward that she told Mamselle Lovisa what Kaisa Nilsdotter
had said and what she herself had replied.

Mamselle Lovisa went white as a sheet.

“Oh, Maja!” she cried, “how could you say that! It would have been
better to tell her that I put a few little sprays of whortleberry green
in her crown.”

“I had to ease her mind to get her to go,” the housekeeper explained.

“And so you said my crown would be of myrtle as surely as hers was. Now
you’ll see, Maja, there will be no bridal-crown for me!”

“Oh, you’ll be married right enough, Mamselle Lovisa. Pastor Milén is
not the man to jilt you.”

“Who knows? Something else might come up to prevent it.”

Mamselle Lovisa worried over this a few days, and then let it pass out
of mind. She had other things to think of. In six months the wedding
was to take place, and she must begin at once on the household linens
and the trousseau.

She set up looms, sewed, and worked monograms. She finally went to
Karlstad to shop, and returned with the fabric for a wedding dress and
a little wire frame of a crown, to be bound with myrtle. She did not
wish to use the old frame worn by so many brides, but wanted a
bridal-crown of her own.

But these purchases had no sooner been made than the unexpected
happened. Pastor Milén became ill and was confined to his bed a long
time. When he recovered sufficiently to be up and about he seemed
strangely changed. People noticed that he did not care to talk with his
betrothed, and never went the short distance to Mårbacka to see her.
When summer came he went away to a health resort. During his long
absence he never once wrote to Mamselle Lovisa. It was a time of
anxiety and distress for her. She inferred from his silence that he
wished to break with her, and sent him back his ring. The day this
happened she said to the old housekeeper:

“Now you see, Maja, that my bridal-crown will not be bound with myrtle,
either.”

       *       *       *       *       *

One day, many years later, one of the young daughters of Lieutenant
Lagerlöf asked her Aunt Lovisa to lend her some of the old peasant
bridal things to dress up in. Mamselle Lovisa gave her the key to the
cupboard where the old treasures were kept and which had long since
been removed to the storeroom upstairs.

The young girl unlocked the cupboard and pulled out a drawer. She gazed
at the contents in astonishment. Before her lay not the usual gaudy
trumpery, but only a parcel of tulle, some coloured satin fabric, and a
little wire form of a bridal-crown. She saw at once that she had opened
the wrong drawer, the bridal things were in the next one. Just the
same, she stood a moment looking into the drawer. It wrung her heart to
think that poor, unhappy Aunt Lovisa had never come to use the things
lying there. She knew that for years her aunt had grieved in silence,
and would not be comforted. Then something came back to memory. One day
during the saddest period of her aunt’s unhappiness she had gone into
her room and had found her sitting before a heap of whortleberry green,
a little wire crown in her hand. Her aunt had cut off a few sprays and
was binding them round the crown, when Fru Lagerlöf came in.

“Why, Lovisa, whatever are you doing?” she had asked with a frightened
look on her face.

“I was thinking,” Mamselle Lovisa had said, dreamily, “that if I would
be content with a crown of whortle---- But that’s stupid!”

Then she had quickly jumped up, brushed aside the crown and the leaves,
and cried out: “I know it’s all ended.” Then pacing the floor and
wringing her hands the while, she had moaned: “There’s no help for it
now.”

“But, my dear Lovisa, it was only on account of his illness,” Fru
Lagerlöf had answered.

Mamselle Lovisa had continued to pace up and down, up and down, in
anguish and despair.

“If only I hadn’t put whortleberry in Kaisa Nilsdotter’s bridal-crown!”
she had wailed.

“Come, come, Lovisa, you mustn’t think that.” Just then Fru Lagerlöf
had caught sight of the child standing there, wide-eyed.

“Go into the other room, Selma,” she had said. “Aunt Lovisa has a
sorrow, and you children must not come here and disturb her.”




VII

“VACKERFELDT”[1]

  [1] Vacker is the Swedish for pretty or handsome.


THE tinkle of a silver bell is heard from the road. Colour-Sergeant
Karl von Wachenfeldt comes driving....

Colour-Sergeant Karl von Wachenfeldt--was it not he who once on a time
was proclaimed the handsomest man in Värmland, if not in all Sweden?
Was it not he who was the idol of the Stockholm ladies the winter
season of 1820, when he visited the Capital to take some sort of
examination in land surveying? Was it not he who made up sleighing
parties and led cotillions with a dash that put all the _beaux
cavaliers_ of the _haute monde_ into the shade? Was it not he who
danced so divinely and conversed so enchantingly that his fine
relatives, who at first would not recognize the poor Värmland
under-officer, finally sent him letters of invitation, couched in the
humblest terms, because the young ladies could have no pleasure at a
ball not graced by his presence?

And was it not he who had such astounding luck at the gaming-table it
enabled him to live that winter in Stockholm like a Lieutenant of the
Guard? Was it not he, by the way, who hobnobbed with counts and barons,
and outshone them in gallantry and elegance? Was it not he who at a
private theatrical in the home of Admiral Wachtmeister played the
leading lover and sang his couplets so passionately that the next
morning he found a score of love letters in his post-box? Was not he
the first to drive through the streets of Stockholm with harness and
trappings adorned with chimes of silver bells? Was it not he who
was known to all Stockholm, so that wherever he appeared, whether
at the Royal Gardens or the Blue Gate, at the Opera or among the
moving throngs in the street, it was whispered: “Look! here comes
_Vackerfeldt._ Oh--oh, see! Here comes _Vackerfeldt!_”

Was it not he who, after his one and only memorable winter in
Stockholm, duplicated his triumphs at Karlstad and wherever else he
chanced to be? Was it not he who, with Sergeant Sellblad as companion
and Drummer Tyberg as valet, went down to Göteborg, where he passed
himself off as a Finnish baron, and for a whole fortnight spoke with a
Finnish accent, while running a gaming-house for the benefit of wealthy
merchants’ gay young sons? Was not he the only under-officer that had
ever got to dance with the haughty Countess of Apertin? And was it not
he who became so enamoured of the beautiful Mamselle Widerström, when
she sang in _La Preciosa_ at the Karlstad theatre, that he abducted her
and would have got over into Norway with her, had not her manager
happily overtaken them at Arvika? And, finally, was it not he who came
to Captain Wästfelt at Angersby as Adjutant something or other, and put
life into the young folk in Fryksdalen? Were ever such grand fair
balls, such merry Christmas feasts, such jolly crayfish parties, and
such delightful wanderings to picturesque places of interest! The
romantic wife of the Captain who lay on a couch all day reading novels,
did she not find in him the embodiment of her heroes of romance! And
her young daughters, were not their first love dreams of him?

On the neighbouring place, Mårbacka, where there was a houseful of
pretty daughters--what happened there? Could they resist a _beau
cavalier_ who manipulated the curling-tongs as skilfully as he did the
guitar, and had the nimbus of Amor shining above his fair, curled hair?

       *       *       *       *       *

Colour-Sergeant von Wachenfeldt comes driving down the rocky road,
while the lone silver bell tinkles feebly and almost mournfully. In the
days of his power and glory the sixty silver bells which hung from the
harness and trappings jingled right merrily. They had, so to speak,
rung in his triumphs, had heralded the coming of a conqueror. But now
when there is only one solitary bell, it seems merely to announce the
approach of a man whose day of fortune and happiness is over.

The Colour-Sergeant rides behind his old horse, Kalle, which is so
noticeably small that everyone he meets in the road turns to look after
it. But, on the other hand, no one turns to look at the horse’s owner.

Driving past Gunnarsby Inn, he sees two young girls standing at the
well. He salutes them with a flourish of his whip, and from force of
habit gives them one of his most seductive smiles, but receives in
return an indifferent glance. The girls do not drop the well bucket in
wonder, or stand rapt with cheeks aglow, to gaze after him.

Colour-Sergeant von Wachenfeldt gives his horse a lash of the whip. He
is no fool. He knows that his hair is gray and his face full of
wrinkles, that his moustache is thin and faded, that one eye is filmed
with a gray cataract, while the other, having been operated upon, is
distorted by a magnifying monocle. He knows that he is old and nothing
to look at now; yet he feels that people should not entirely forget
what he once was. True, he has no better home nowadays than two hired
rooms at a farmhouse in Stor Kil Parish. His only possessions are a
horse, a carriole, a sleigh, and a few pieces of furniture, and his
only subordinate is a crotchety old serving woman. For all that, he
thinks it should not be completely forgotten that once he was
_Vackerfeldt_, the celebrated _Vackerfeldt._

He sits there in a mangy old fur coat and a still shabbier seal-skin
cap. He wears thick lynx mittens to protect his gouty hands, but
the distorted joints are noticeable even through the thick mittens.
Nevertheless it is he, Wachenfeldt--he who has held so many beautiful
women in his arms! The memory of that none can take from him. Who else
in these parts has lived such a life and been so adored?

Pressing his lips together he tells himself he has nothing to regret.
If he could live his life over again he would have it the same. All
that youth and health and good looks can give a man he has
enjoyed--love and adventure in fullest measure.

One thing perhaps Colour-Sergeant von Wachenfeldt wishes he had left
undone. He should not have married Anna Lagerlöf, the noblest woman he
had ever known. He had loved her madly, but he never should have
espoused her.

Was it fitting that a _Vackerfeldt_ should settle down to the prudent
management of a farm and not try to harvest gold in some easier and
pleasanter way? If his wife was adorable, must he needs think her the
only adorable one? Could he change his nature by marrying? Was it not
through his success as gambler and lover he had won his fame?

Yes, he regrets his marriage. His wife was not suited to him, but he
concedes that she was too good for him. She had wanted orderliness,
industry, tranquillity, and comfort, and had worn herself out trying to
make a home for them, such as she had had at Mårbacka.

Others might think he should not so much regret having married as
having caused his wife grief and humiliation. After seventeen years
of domestic infelicity, when Anna von Wachenfeldt could endure no
more, she died. Then misfortunes of all sorts befell him. The creditors
showed no further indulgence, but took away his home. He had to
give up gambling, for now he lost as soon as he touched a card. The
gout had also come, and the gray cataract. Before he had reached
sixty he was white-haired, stiff-jointed, half-blind, helpless, and
poverty-stricken. It would have been no small comfort to him now to
have had his good, loving wife still with him.

Since her death he had been cut off from all social intercourse. No one
cared whether he lived or died. None invited him to their homes. It
looked as if people had merely tolerated him for his wife’s sake. When
he yearns for laughter and merriment, when he would like to sit down to
a well-served dinner and talk with cultured people, he has no place to
go. When the holidays come round, with their long leisure hours, when
he would like to escape from the deadly monotony of the farmhouse, he
does not know what to do with himself.

There is just one place in the world where he can go for a bit of a
taste of the old life, and that place is Mårbacka, whence he had
brought his wife. He knows what they think and feel there--that he had
made her life very unhappy. They actually believe that he tormented her
to death. Nevertheless, he journeys thither thrice a year for the
great holiday festivities. But for these visits to Mårbacka his life
would be intolerable.

The silver bell rings out a loud plaint. The Colour-Sergeant has just
dealt his little horse a stinging blow. Life has many bitter fruits,
which one must take. It seems quite proper that the horse should share
the pain of his master.

       *       *       *       *       *

If the little Mårbacka children had not known by any other signs that
Christmas was at hand, they would have guessed it when Colour-Sergeant
von Wachenfeldt appeared.

They were overjoyed when they saw his horse and cutter coming up the
driveway. They raced through the house shouting the glad tidings, and
rushed out on the steps to greet him, crying Good-day and Welcome. They
fetched bread for his horse and carried his lean carpet-bag,
embroidered in cross-stitched leaves and flowers, down to the
Lieutenant’s office, which the Sergeant was to occupy.

It was remarkable that the children were always so glad to see
Colour-Sergeant von Wachenfeldt, for he never brought them any goodies
or presents. But they must have thought him a part of Christmas, which
no doubt accounted for their joy. Anyhow, it was well they were
friendly, for the grown folk made no ado over him. Fru Lagerlöf and
Mamselle Lovisa did not go out to receive the guest, and it was with
rather a heavy sigh the Lieutenant put down his Värmland News, and
arose from his rocker to go and meet him.

“Well, well, so you’re here again, Wachenfeldt!” he said, as he stood
on the steps. After putting a few queries as to the state of the roads
and the journey, he conducted his brother-in-law to his room, where he
cleared out a drawer of his chiffonier and made place in the wardrobe;
then he went off with his children, leaving the guest to himself.

With each visit of the Colour-Sergeant memories of the Lieutenant’s
dead sister became more and more poignant. She was the eldest child;
she had cared for him when he was a little chap, had dressed and
undressed him, and coddled him. He had loved her best of all his
sisters, had been more proud of her than of the others. And then she
had to go and fall in love with a worthless fellow like this
Wachenfeldt! She was both beautiful and noble, and as good and true as
she looked. She had always been sunny, and had brightened the lives of
those about her. She had striven to the last breath to keep her home;
the husband had only wasted and squandered. She would not let her
family know how hard she had it, lest they should come to her aid. So
she broke under the strain when she was barely forty.

It was a sad and distressing tale, and the Lieutenant, while this was
seething in him, could not be cordial to Von Wachenfeldt; he had
therefore to take a long walk to let his indignation cool a bit.

Fru Lagerlöf and Mamselle Lovisa felt much as he did. Anna Wachenfeldt
had been the favourite sister-in-law of Fru Lagerlöf, who had looked up
to her with genuine admiration. Anna had been the one to welcome her
most heartily into the family, and she could never forgive
Colour-Sergeant von Wachenfeldt for making this beloved woman unhappy.

Mamselle Lovisa, as a child, had made long visits at Valsäter, the home
of the Wachenfeldts, and knew more about her sister’s troubles than any
of them. She could never hear the name Wachenfeldt without thinking of
a certain morning when a couple of strange men came to Valsäter and led
from the barn the two best cows. Her sister had run out and asked them
what they were doing there, and they had coolly answered that the
Sergeant the night before had staked the cows in a game with their
master, and lost. Mamselle Lovisa saw her sister as it were before her,
and remembered how distressed she had been over this. “He will never
come to his senses,” she had said, “until he has made an end of me.”

However, Mamselle Lovisa was the first to think of her duties as
hostess. She got up from the sewing table, where she had been
embroidering and betimes taking little peeps into a novel that lay open
in her sewing basket, and went to the kitchen door.

“Maja dear,” she called to the housekeeper, apologetically, “now we
have Wachenfeldt here again!”

“I can’t understand why that fellow, who was so mean to his wife, is
allowed to come here at every holiday time,” the housekeeper retorted
with considerable asperity.

“But one can’t very well drive him away,” pleaded Mamselle Lovisa. “And
now, Maja, please put the coffeepot on, so that he’ll have something to
warm him a bit after his long, cold drive.”

“Why must he always come just when you’ve all had your coffee and the
fire’s gone dead in the stove!” The housekeeper looked as if she were
not going to make a move.

But the coffeepot must have got on somehow, for shortly afterward the
housemaid went down to the office and bade Colour-Sergeant von
Wachenfeldt come to the living room for coffee.

In crossing the yard to the house, he walked with the aid of a cane,
which he put by in the outer hall, and carried himself fairly well as
he came into the room. Mamselle Lovisa, who stood there to receive him,
noticed all the same that he had difficulty in walking. When she took
his hands she felt how swollen they were, and when she looked up into
his face, his distorted eye stared at her horribly. Then a good part of
her resentment vanished. She thought to herself that he had already
received his punishment, and she was not going to add woe to woe.

“It was nice that Wachenfeldt could come to us again this Christmas,”
she forced herself to say. Whereupon she poured him some coffee and he
went over to his accustomed place, between the porcelain stove and
the folded card table. It was a modest corner, and also the warmest in
the room. The Colour-Sergeant knew what he was about when he chose that
seat.

He at once began telling Mamselle Lovisa about his servant, Inga, and
her constant quarrels and fights with the peasants who owned the farm
where he lived. He knew that such petty gossip amused his
sister-in-law, and did not fail to observe that she presently poured
herself a cup of coffee so as to keep him company.

Dusk had fallen while they chatted over their coffee cups, a light was
brought and placed on the round table over by the sofa, soon after
which Fru Lagerlöf appeared.

She had not conquered her feeling of aversion, and it was a cool
reception the Colour-Sergeant got from her; she barely touched his
hand, but did not speak, and then sat down to her work.

The Colour-Sergeant, who calmly went on talking to Mamselle Lovisa,
quickly changed the topic of conversation. He told about some strange
cases of sickness among the people and the animals on the farm, which
he had succeeded in curing.

Here was something that interested Fru Lagerlöf; it was in her line.
Before she knew it, she had been drawn into the conversation.

Finally the Lieutenant came in and sank into his rocker. At first he
was silent and depressed. But now, without anyone’s quite knowing how
it came about, the conversation drifted in another direction. It
carried back to old Karlstad, where the Colour-Sergeant was born and
the Lieutenant went to school, and of which the latter loved to talk.
Then it swung up to Stockholm, and took in Emilie Högquist, Jenny Lind,
and much else of a by-gone day that was beautiful and memorable. At
last they fell to telling old Värmland tales, and the evening passed so
quickly they were all astonished when the maid came in to lay the table
for supper.

The amazing thing about it all was that when Colour-Sergeant von
Wachenfeldt related any of his personal experiences he invariably stood
out as the wisest and most prudent man one could wish to meet. That he
had taken part in many adventures and exploits was true enough, but he
had always played the rôle of the counselling friend who helped stupid
folk out of their scrapes.

Just to mention the Wästfelts of Angersby: what a staff he had been to
these nice, childish persons! Particularly at the time when the son’s
intended threw him over and announced her engagement to another. No man
ever spoke with greater veneration of his mother or his wife. Such a
model son and devoted husband all might wish to have. He had always
talked sensibly to young women, smoothed out lovers’ quarrels, and
welded together marriage bonds that threatened to break asunder. All
the unhappy ones had made a confidant of him, and he had never betrayed
them. He had even saved men seized with the gambling fever, had talked
them to rights and reminded them of their duties.

After supper, when Von Wachenfeldt had limped down to his room,
Lieutenant Lagerlöf, his wife and sister sat staring at each
other--dumbfounded.

“Oh, that Wachenfeldt!” the Lieutenant exclaimed. “He’s a wonder; he
knows more than all of us put together.”

“It is always a pleasure to talk with Wachenfeldt,” said Mamselle
Lovisa.

“If it is true that he has been so helpful to others, then how does it
happen that he has managed his own affairs so badly?” queried Fru
Lagerlöf, dryly.

“Some folks are like that,” the Lieutenant averred.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thenceforth, Colour-Sergeant von Wachenfeldt “feasted right royally,”
as is said in _Fritiof’s Saga_--throughout the Christmas holidays,
playing the wise and all-knowing old man. One could get his advice on
almost everything. He could prescribe for pimples and the snuffles,
give counsel in matters of dress, write recipes for cooking and dyeing,
give instruction in agriculture, and offer the best and cleverest
judgments of people. They appealed to him to settle knotty problems.

“Doesn’t Wachenfeldt think it strange these children cannot be induced
to eat carrots?” Mamselle Lovisa once put to him.

Colour-Sergeant von Wachenfeldt rose to the occasion.

“Wake me in the middle of the night and offer me carrots, and I’ll
eat.”

It was positively unnatural his being so reasonable and practical. The
dashing cavalier of old, the conquering hero with the sixty silver
bells, was apparently no more.

Then it happened that Lieutenant Lagerlöf during one of Wachenfeldt’s
visits got into an argument with the ladies about a young girl in the
district. Fru Lagerlöf and Mamselle Lovisa both thought her sweet and
winsome, while the Lieutenant declared that no man could ever fall in
love with her. He appealed the case in point to Wachenfeldt, as was the
custom in the family.

“Tell me, Wachenfeldt, you who are a judge of women--would you kiss
such a little Miss Snippit?”

Colour-Sergeant von Wachenfeldt, old as he was, flushed. He struck the
table with his fist, half-rose from his seat, and thundered:

“Don’t ask me such a thing! I have never kissed a homely woman.”

The ungodly persons round him broke into hilarious shrieks. Here he had
been acting the part of the sage and the plain man of common sense, yet
a simple little query like that had unmasked him. The old _beau
cavalier_ still survived in him. Sick and wretched, old and dilapidated
as he was, let none think or assume that he would kiss a plain woman.

O _Vackerfeldt! Vackerfeldt!_




VIII

THE ORCHESTRA


IT WAS an impromptu orchestra that played that day at Mårbacka. There
was Major Ehrencrona, a Finn by birth, who in former days had lived in
a palatial home and been a _grand seigneur_, but who now in his old age
occupied a rented room at a farmhouse, where he led a dull and
monotonous existence, much like that of Colour-Sergeant von
Wachenfeldt. He was reputed to be a master of the French horn; but
since he had become poor and lonely he had not been heard to play.

And there was Herr Tyberg, who began life as drummer-boy with the
Värmland Regiment and who surely would have killed himself with drink,
had not the Lieutenant at Mårbacka, by a mere chance, discovered the
man’s special aptitude for teaching small children, and engaged him as
tutor for his own little ones, and later found him a position as
teacher in the elementary school at East Ämtervik.

Then, there was Jan Asker, who had also been in the regiment band, but
who was now church-beadle and grave-digger at East Ämtervik. He came of
an old family of musicians, and used to play the clarinet at all the
peasant weddings and dances. His was an embittered and restless spirit.
The only thing that reconciled him to life was music.

And there was the foundry bookkeeper, Geijer, who lived in the attic of
the school building, and kept house for himself. He was passionately
fond of music, but being too poor to provide himself with any sort of
instrument, he had painted a keyboard on a common deal table, at which
he sat and “played.”

Then, too, there was Sexton Melanoz, who had received instruction from
Dean Fryxell himself, and could scribble verse, cobble shoes, mend
furniture, and run a farm. He was the star entertainer at all the
weddings and wakes, and was moreover the best schoolmaster in the whole
of Fryksdalen. Every Sunday morning he had to play the wheezy organ at
the Ämtervik church, which he never could have endured if he’d not had
his violin to console him on Sunday afternoons, for he was a musical
soul.

These five had arranged to meet at Mårbacka on a certain day during the
Christmas season, while there was still something left of the Christmas
ale, the Christmas ham, and spiced bread.

The first to arrive did not go straight to the house, but waited till
all were there. Whereupon they fell into line, the Major in the lead,
and marched up to the front porch singing _Portugal, Spanjen, Stora
Britanjen._

Lieutenant Lagerlöf had perhaps some notion as to what was in the air,
but he had remained inside so as not to spoil the fun for the guests.
But on hearing that song, he jumped up and ran out to greet them. Nor
was Colour-Sergeant von Wachenfeldt, who was still at Mårbacka, long to
follow.

When the visitors had gone down to the farm-office to remove their
pelts and leggings, the Lieutenant sent his two boys, Daniel and Johan,
up to the attic to fetch the guitar, the French horn, the flute, and
the triangle, while he himself rushed into the bedroom and pulled his
violin from under the bed; placing it on a chair, he unlocked the case
and reverently uncovered the violin, which lay wrapped in a red silk
handkerchief.

Though the Lieutenant himself never smoked or permitted others to smoke
in the house, he sent the boys down to the office to fetch the old
long-stemmed pipe, which had been there since Pastor Wennervik’s time,
and also a little square box filled with tobacco, so that Major
Ehrencrona might have his usual smoke, to keep him in good humour.

When the five guests, the Colour-Sergeant, and the Lieutenant went into
the living room, when the toddy-tray had been brought, and hot drinks
made for all--except Herr Tyberg, of course, who had sworn off for
good--and when the major had finally got his pipe to draw, they decided
it was not worth while to pass the evening at card-playing or in
small-talk, but they would have some music.

It was this the Lieutenant had anticipated; so now he went for the
instruments he had hurriedly assembled. His violin he offered to Sexton
Melanoz, who most humbly protested that there were those in the room
far more worthy than he to handle this, the greatest of all musical
instruments. But when none claimed the distinction, he was as pleased
as if he had suddenly come into a fortune, and at once proceeded to
tune up.

The flute went to Herr Tyberg, of course. It had been his instrument in
the regiment, when he had outgrown the drum. He was well acquainted
with the old flute at Mårbacka, and knew it to be always dry and leaky.
So he ran out to the kitchen to dip the flute in pale beer and bind it
round with tow, to make it hold together.

The guitar was handed to Bookkeeper Geijer, who had a long thin face, a
long slender neck, limpid blue eyes, and long slim fingers. There was a
certain wistfulness about him, a sort of languishing grace. With a
little girlish laugh, he strung the guitar-ribbon round his neck and
tenderly pressed the instrument to his heart, as if embracing a
sweetheart. The guitar had only three strings, but they were enough for
him who was wont to perform on nothing better than a deal table.

Church-beadle Asker had had the foresight to bring his own clarinet. It
was in the back pocket of his greatcoat, so that he had only to go down
to the office and fetch it.

Colour-Sergeant von Wachenfeldt, sitting in his usual corner by the
fire, tried to put on a good face, though he could not perform on any
musical instrument with his gout-stiffened fingers. But the Lieutenant
now went over to him with the triangle, which he could manage with
ease. So the Colour-Sergeant, too, was happy.

Major Ehrencrona sat blowing smoke through his big white moustache. He
saw how one after another had been provided with an instrument, but
feigned indifference.

“Just give me a couple of pot-lids,” he said to the Lieutenant, “so
that I may at least join in the noise-making. I know, of course, that
the instrument I play is not to be found in this house.”

Like a streak, the Lieutenant darted into the parlour and came back
with a brilliantly polished French horn, with green silk cord and
tassel, he had managed to procure for the Major.

“What do you say to this, Uncle?” he asked him.

The old major beamed.

“Ha! you’re a real fellow, Brother Eric Gustaf!” He put down his pipe
and began to toot vociferously, sending out a volley of ear-splitting
blasts.

Now that the guests were all furnished with instruments, they remarked
that the host himself had none. Whereupon, the Lieutenant produced a
little wooden whistle, one end of which must be placed in a glass of
water when one blew upon it. By so doing one could make trills as sweet
as any nightingale’s.

And last, they begged Fru Lagerlöf to accompany them on the piano.

In honour of the Major they first essayed the stirring Finnish martial
hymn, the “March of the Björneborgers.” Fru Lagerlöf struck the opening
chords, and the orchestra followed as best it could. It was a clang and
a din that took the house by storm.

They did their best, all of them. Sexton Melanoz, Jan Asker, and Herr
Tyberg played with a certain assurance, but the Major frequently lagged
behind and the Lieutenant put in a few haphazard trills, due in part to
the freakish behaviour of his “nightingale” and in part to a
mischievous desire to throw the others out of time.

When they had played the march through once they were so enlivened and
interested they wanted to go over it again, to get it quite perfect.
The Major blew and tooted till his eyes were red and his cheeks
distended, as if ready to split. Obviously, he was not as proficient at
the horn as he had made himself out, for he did not play in time even
on second trial.

Of a sudden he jumped up and hurled the French horn across the room
toward the chimney corner with such force that it came near crushing
Colour-Sergeant von Wachenfeldt’s most sensitive toe.

“Hang it all!” he shouted. “I’m not going to sit here and spoil the
Björneborgers’ March.... Play on, you who can!”

The others were a bit disconcerted, naturally, but they took up the
march for the third time. And now the Major sang, _Sons of a race that
bled._ He carried the air in a deep, rich bass that filled the whole
house. The human voice flowed on like a mighty tide, bearing along with
it the tinny old piano, the shrill clarinet, the violin, scraped in old
fiddler-fashion, the three-stringed guitar, the Sergeant’s triangle and
the Lieutenant’s capricious nightingale.

Their hearts warmed, for the loss of Finland still rankled in their
breasts; and now they seemed to be marching with the brave Björneborg
lads to take back their country from the Russians.

When the march was finished the Lieutenant motioned to his wife, who
struck up _Worthy Fathers, Noble Shadows_, from the opera of “Gustaf
Vasa,” which was the Major’s great show piece. He rendered the song
with power and feeling, and the instruments seemed almost to sing with
him.

Over on the straight-backed sofa, quiet as mice, sat all the
children--Daniel, Johan, Anna, Selma, and Gerda--listening. What could
they do but keep still, when the grown-ups played and carried on like
youngsters? When the Major sang Worthy Fathers, Noble Shadows, they
thought he sang of himself and the others who were performing in the
living room.

To the children they were all like ghosts of a vanished
something--shadows of a great and glorious past of which they could but
catch the faint gleams of an afterglow.




THE NEW MÅRBACKA




I

THE SEVENTEEN CATS


THERE was a cow-girl at Mårbacka named Britta Lambert, who had been on
the place from the time of the Paymaster of the Regiment. She was
little and ugly, with a face like old parchment, and she had only one
eye. In the company of humans she was crabbed and surly, but she loved
animals. If a cow was expected to calve in the night, she would make up
a bed in the barn and sleep there. Every day she would heat water in
the brew house and carry great bucketfuls down to the barn, so that the
cows might have warm mash. When the hay ran low in the cow-house, along
in April, and the cows had to chew on rye-straw, she was not above
sneaking over to the stable and stealing hay from the horses.

The barn in which she ruled was very old and so dark you could scarcely
see your hand before you; the passageways were narrow, the floor was
worn full of holes, and the cows stood in cramped little stalls, which
Britta did not think to keep clean. Nevertheless, steady contentment
reigned in the old cow-house. There was no fear of a cow’s overfeeding,
or getting anything sharp in her fodder, or that aught would go wrong
with the calving. There were lots of calves and plenty of milk. The
mistress at Mårbacka never had any anxiety concerning the cow-house.

But there was one species of animal Britta Lambert loved even better
than she loved the cow, and that was the cat. She believed that cats
had some sort of supernatural power to protect her and her cattle. The
worst thing one could ask of her was to drown a kitten now and then,
lest there should be more cats than cows to care for. When anyone
stepped inside the dark cow-house he was met on all sides by the
uncanny gleam of green cat-eyes. The cats got under his feet and sprang
on to his shoulders--for that Britta had got them into the habit of
doing.

When Lieutenant Lagerlöf took over Mårbacka, on the death of his
father, there were no less than seventeen cats in the barn. They were
all of the tortoise-shell variety, with not a black or white or gray
one among them. For Britta Lambert believed it was only the red cats
that brought luck.

Now the Lieutenant was a great lover of animals, and he had no
antipathy whatever to cats; but to feed and house seventeen of them in
the barn--that, he thought, was a bit too much. The cats, to be sure,
were vigilant hunters of rats and field-mice, but they also pursued
little birds; there was hardly so much as a sparrow left at Mårbacka.
Besides, the milk they consumed would have fed three calves.

Anyway, it’s a sorry business having to do away with cats. So the
Lieutenant, rather than distress Britta Lambert and the other
womenfolk, said nothing to them about a certain plan he had in mind. He
merely gave the wink to old Bengt, the former stableman, who still
pottered round the place at this and that.

Then, in some mysterious way the cats began to disappear--not all at
once, but by gradual elimination. Britta Lambert thought she noticed
that one and another of her precious tabbies was missing, yet she was
not quite sure about it, since the cats were all so much alike in
colour and markings. She attempted to count them as they came up for
their milk, but that was not so easy, for they pushed and crowded each
other at the milk-trough. Then, too, it was almost pitch-dark in the
barn. She complained to the old housekeeper and the young mistress.

“You see,” she said, “’tis this I fear me, that if you do away with the
red cats, you’ll do away with the luck in the cow-house. No good can
come to folks as begins by being ungrateful to them that’s helped us
all up to now.”

Fru Lagerlöf and the housekeeper both assured her they had no evil
designs upon her cats. They thought she would soon have them back
again--the whole seventeen.

All the same, Britta noted that the cats were becoming fewer and fewer.
She suspected this one and that one, but none would confess to guilt.
The only one of whom she could never have believed anything so sinful
as that he would harm a cat, was the Lieutenant. She knew that his
mother had taught him better.

“This’ll never do, Master,” she said to the Lieutenant every time he
came into the barn. “You don’t know how worried I am! The cats are
leaving me.”

“I don’t see but they’re running in front of my feet the same as
usual,” the Lieutenant replied.

“If there be thirteen left, ’tis all and no more,” wailed the cow-girl.
“I’d hate to be standing in the shoes of the one that’s doing this! And
worst of all, the farm’ll suffer for it.”

Now in those days the Lieutenant was a strong young man and an
ambitious, enterprising farmer. He had big plans for Mårbacka. The
estate was not extensive, but the soil was rich and the fields,
spreading in one continuous stretch of expanse, were level and clear of
stones. It would be no fault of his if the farm did not some day become
the finest in the whole Fryken Valley. He had money at his command, for
his father-in-law, Squire Wallroth, who was a man of means, admired his
son-in-law’s initiative and enterprise, and gave him the support he
needed.

The Lieutenant set about reparcelling the land for rotation of crops.
He dug ditches a fathom deep for drainage, and sowed timothy and clover
in the meadows, so that they would produce something besides wild
flowers; he bought a threshing machine, which did away with their
having to stand in a barn all winter beating out the grain with flails,
and he also procured some tall, fine-bred cattle from the manors down
by the Ness. He did not let the cows wander in the woods from spring to
autumn, and half-starve, but sent them to pasture in the open meadow.
Everything that could be thought of to enhance the value of the farm
was done: he carried on protracted negotiations with the peasants on
the west side of the dale for the purchase of lands adjoining his; he
built cottages for his workmen, that they might have decent homes, with
outbuildings and a bit of ground where they could keep a cow and a pig.

Nor were his labours in vain. Within a year the farm paid back all he
had laid out on it. There was such a harvest of hay he hardly knew
where to store it all for the winter. For every bushel of peas sown he
got twenty bushels in return, and when he planted turnips the ground
gave forth such a blessed abundance it was more than his own folk could
gather in. So he sent word to the neighbours to come with horse and
cart, and take home all the turnips they could dig.

However, there was one serious obstacle to this work of improving the
farm, and that was the little river Ämtan, which meandered in all sorts
of graceful bends and curves down in the dale, where his fields lay.
Ordinarily, the stream was not much bigger than a forest brook, but as
soon as there came a good fall of rain it overflowed its banks,
converting his clover meadows and oat fields into little lakes.

The Lieutenant decided that something must be done about the river.
Where it flowed through his own property he deepened its bed and
straightened its course. But little good came of that, for the peasants
who owned the land below Mårbacka let the river run on in its old
tortuous, sluggish way. Whenever there was a heavy rain it flooded
their acres as well as his.

What was the good of all his labour with the soil, if Ämtan could at
any time wash away his haystacks and rye-shooks? He would never be able
to develop his property as he wished until the river was mastered.

He talked with the neighbours, and they seemed to be in favour of
having the river properly dredged. A surveyor was consulted, who drew,
measured, and made calculations; after which the Lieutenant convened a
meeting of all interested parties at the parish public room.

More than a few obstacles had been surmounted by the time he had got
thus far along with the project. The morning he was to drive to the
meeting he felt quite happy, thinking that now the most difficult part
of the work had been accomplished. But as he was getting into his
carriole, right in the middle of the seat sat one of the red barn cats
staring blankly at him.

There was nothing strange in that, however. The barn cats all loved to
ride. Britta Lambert had trundled them in her wheel-barrow from the
time they were tiny kittens, and in that way they had become as fond of
riding as children, and would jump into all the farm vehicles. But they
were not in the habit of venturing into the family carriages.

“So you’d like to come along to the meeting, would you?” said the
Lieutenant. “Scat!”

The cat deigned to take itself off, but not before it had given the
Lieutenant a sardonic look that made him feel positively uncomfortable.

Between the stable and the road the Lieutenant had to pass through
three gates. On each of the gateposts sat a red barn cat. Nor was there
anything strange in that. Cats like to sit on gateposts to sun
themselves and watch everything that moves on the ground below. But
that morning the Lieutenant thought the cats all had a sinister look;
they blinked at him as if they knew what would come of his trip. He was
beginning to think Britta Lambert was right--that they were little
witches and goblins in the guise of cats.

Now it is not a good omen to meet a lot of cats when one sets out on a
journey, so the Lieutenant spat three times for each cat, as his mother
had taught him to do, and thought no more about them during the drive.
He went over in his mind the whole plan of the ditching and prepared
himself to lay the proposition before the meeting clearly and
convincingly.

But instantly the Lieutenant stepped inside the parish room, an
unmistakable air of wariness and opposition assailed him. The peasants
sat there immovable, with tight-shut faces. He began to surmise that
they had changed their minds, which proved to be the case. All his
arguments were overruled.

“We understand, of course, that this ditching would be a good thing for
Mårbacka,” said their spokesman, “but it’s of no importance to us.”

When he came back from the meeting he felt rather depressed. The matter
of the dredging was settled for some time to come. The river could go
on creating havoc. If a stray herd of cattle trampled his fields he
could drive them out, but the river must be left free to choke and
destroy all in its path.

In the midst of these broodings on his frustrated hopes, he got up and
went over to the servants’ hall to see Bengt.

“It didn’t go through, Bengt, that about the river,” he said.

“That’s too bad, Lieutenant!” the old man sympathized. “The Paymaster
of the Regiment always said the farm would be worth twice as much if it
wasn’t for Ämtan.”

“I say, Bengt”--the Lieutenant lowered his voice--“there aren’t so many
cats in the barn now, eh?... Perhaps we’d better let Britta keep what’s
left of them.”

“Just as you wish, Lieutenant.”

The Lieutenant lowered his voice a bit more, as if fearful lest the
walls of the old manservants’ room might hear what he said.

“Where did you drown them, Bengt?”

“I took ’em down to the river. I was afraid they’d come floating up and
be seen, if I drowned them here in the duck pond.”

“H’m, in the river--I thought so!” The Lieutenant stood reflecting a
long while. Suddenly he burst out: “There’s a lot that’s queer in this
world!”

“Ay, there is that,” old Bengt agreed.

As long as Lieutenant Lagerlöf lived he had to let the river do as it
would with his fine fields. Year after year he saw it overflow its
banks and spread out in innumerable lake-like ponds, from Mårbacka down
through the whole dale. And every time it occurred he would tell about
the red cats that sat on the gateposts the morning he drove down to the
meeting. Could it be possible that they knew how badly things would go
for him? And was it true that one who did violence to a cat was
punished? He wondered about that to the end of his days.




II

THE NEW BARN


LIEUTENANT LAGERLÖF wanted to have Mårbacka not only a productive and
well-cared-for farm, but a beautiful place, with stately avenues of
approach and extensive gardens of flowers and shrubbery on all sides of
the dwelling house.

Not far from the house stood the wretched old cow-barn, with its
thatched roof, its small window-openings, and its weather-beaten timber
walls. To be sure, there was a row of century-old sycamores, with
yellow, lichen-clad trunks and a wealth of foliage, which concealed the
building from view, so that the place was perhaps not so very ugly
after all. Still, the Lieutenant declared he could never make Mårbacka
look like a manor until that cow-house was torn down.

The first few years he had been wholly occupied with the cultivation of
the soil; it was not till after the Strömstad visit and the death of
Grandmother Lagerlöf that he set about building the new barn, which had
to be finished before the old one could be pulled down. That the new
barn might not be easily seen from the house, he decided to build it on
the level meadow just below the sand-hill, where the other outhouses
stood. When the womenfolk heard of this, a wail went up. Think of their
having to go that long distance to tend the cows! And think how hard it
would be on the cow-girl and the dairy-maid to have to carry the milk
three times a day up the steep hill to the dairy! The Lieutenant turned
a deaf ear. He was going to remove all the outbuildings and have
everything of the sort, including the dairy, centred in the one place,
thereby making it much easier for both serving-folk and animals.

The barn, though it would lie in an out-of-the-way spot, was going to
be the finest in the whole district. It was to be built in the form of
a cross, and of brick all the way up to the eaves-course, and would
house at least fifty cows. It would only be lacking a spire to look
like a church.

The Lieutenant discussed his building project with his father-in-law,
Squire Wallroth, who had seen enough of the old cow-house to know that
a new one was badly needed. He gave the Lieutenant quite a large sum of
money for building purposes, and the latter immediately went ahead with
the preliminary work. For two consecutive winters he quarried stone at
Åsberget for the foundation; for two whole summers he had a clay-mill
standing down by the duck pond, where the bricks were made and left to
dry and harden in the sun; and for two autumns he had men at work in
his own woodlands, cutting timber, that he might have proper material
for cross-beams and rafters.

At last he was ready to stake out the ground and start digging for the
foundation. It was a great moment for him when the workmen put their
spades to the ground to clear away the first layer of earth. They began
the digging and foundation-laying on the east side, which was nearest
the house. There all went well; the ground was firm and the stones
stayed where they were put. But when they came to lay the stones on the
west side, which gave on the field, they found that there had been a
terrible miscalculation. They had not gone very deep before they came
upon soft blue-clay, into which the stones sank and disappeared. The
Lieutenant had made the grave mistake of not having the ground tested.
But now that the foundation had been laid on one side, he thought it
best to go on with the building in the place he had staked out. An old
mason advised him to put the barn farther up toward the hill, as blue
clay was treacherous stuff to build on. The Lieutenant would not hear
of that. It would be all right, he said, to lay the foundation on blue
clay; there must be a bottom even to that. As for stone to fill it in,
well--there was the whole mountain range to take from.

Load after load of stone was dumped on to the clay and before long he
had a wide stone dam there--solid and steady as could be--on which it
seemed safe enough to lay a foundation. Then, one day, came a couple of
heavy showers, and all at once cracks appeared in the dam. The next
morning it began to sink, and in a few hours it was completely
swallowed up.

But all summer the Lieutenant went on dumping stone into the clay, and
when by autumn it was still uncertain whether the foundation would
hold, he decided to put off the masonry work till the following year,
in order to see how the blue clay would behave in the spring, when the
frost was out of the ground.

As soon as the snow was gone, the Lieutenant went down to have a look
at his wall. Yes, it was still there, no cracks in it. But then the
regular spring thaw had not begun.

Every day, and many times a day, he went down to see how things were
going. The wall remained intact, and the ground seemed now to be free
of frost, so he ventured to send word to the master mason to come with
his journeymen, and begin work.

They put up the walls on the north and east sides first, so as to give
the insecure foundation on the west side time to settle. The latter
part of June they began work on the doubtful side, and by the middle of
July, when they had got almost up to the coping, they noticed some
cracks in the wall. Then, all at once, the wall began to sag, and
several layers of brick had to be torn down quickly, lest the whole
wall give way.

Now things began to look serious for Lieutenant Lagerlöf. What to do
next he did not know. By that time the money he had received from his
father-in-law was used up. But Squire Wallroth, who was both
open-handed and reasonable, would no doubt have let him have an
additional sum, had he written and explained why the building would
cost more than he had estimated. But after this fresh cave-in he felt
loath to write. He would have to confess that as yet the barn had
neither roof nor floor, that the walls were not even finished and that
he must start laying a new foundation. His father-in-law would surely
think he had shown poor judgment, and lose confidence in him.

The Lieutenant almost felt like giving up the whole building
scheme--yet, somehow, the mere thought of it went against him. So many
of his projects had come to naught, and, besides, the old cow-house was
beyond repair.

Of course he should have started building on another spot long ago. But
how could he do so now, when the walls were half-finished? It was a
question which would entail the lesser outlay--to start building in a
new place or continue at the old one.

At East Ämtervik lies a small foundry estate known as Gårdsjö, which is
about three English miles from Mårbacka. Living there at that time was
a brother of Fru Lagerlöf, Iron Master Karl Wallroth, a wise and
prudent man on whose judgment the Lieutenant relied implicitly. To him
he went for advice. Iron Master Wallroth counselled him by all means to
dismiss the whole matter from his mind.

“It would be foolish to ask Father for more money to put into your
building scheme,” he said. “He’s always ready to give one a lift, but
he wants to see the money used to good advantage. And to put a
mortgage on the estate in order to finish your barn would not be
advisable. No telling how many times the work will have to be done
over. You might lose all you have by it.”

Afterward, the Lieutenant sat talking the whole evening with the
brother-in-law and his wife, who insisted on his staying for supper. He
tried to be his usual jolly self, and entertain them with amusing
stories; but his spirit was as if paralyzed. He knew the brother-in-law
was right, and therefore felt no resentment, though it was such a
crushing blow to his pride not to be able to complete a work begun.

On the way home strange, gloomy thoughts arose in him; he wondered if
he were not one whose every undertaking was doomed to failure. There
was a time when he thought himself a veritable Fortune’s Favourite.
That was when he had captured his wife and taken over Mårbacka. But
later on he had had a lot of ill-luck. For one thing, he had asked for
his discharge from the military service merely because of a slight
reprimand from his captain. He had been overhasty, but he did not worry
about that. What did rankle in him, though, was that he had not been
appointed Paymaster of the Regiment, to succeed his father. The office
had been abolished, and the duties pertaining to it had been divided
between four muster-clerks, of whom he was one. But the work was
unimportant and the remuneration small. Then there was the attempt to
have the river dredged--it, too, had failed.

Midway between Gårdsjö and Mårbacka lies As Springs, an old health
resort he had once undertaken to modernize. He had built a fine new
bath house and engaged a corps of male and female attendants, with the
hope that health-seekers would flock to the place. That was also a
failure. Now and again an invalid came, but it hardly paid to keep the
resort open.

And to cap it all, his barn-building was a lamentable failure! There
must be something lacking in him, he thought; he was perhaps less
capable than other men. The best thing he could do was to give up his
plans, settle down in his rocker, read his newspaper, and let things
run on in the old ruts.

Coming home he found his wife seated on the front steps awaiting him.
She was very like her brother at Gårdsjö; she had the same intelligent
face, the same clear head, the same serious turn of mind, the same love
of work and indifference to pleasure, and the same dislike of all that
was uncertain and venturesome.

The Lieutenant was very fond of his wife and moreover respected her
judgment as he did her brother’s. But that evening he would rather she
had not sat up for him. She, too, was against him in this building
project.

“What did Kalle say?” Fru Lagerlöf asked him, as they went to their
room.

“He thinks like you and the rest, that I should give up the work.”

Fru Lagerlöf made no reply. She had dropped into her usual place, by
the sewing table, and sat looking out into the light summer night, with
no thought, apparently, of retiring.

The Lieutenant had already flung off his coat. “Aren’t you going to
bed?” he asked. His rasping tones betrayed his irritation and
despondency.

“I think,” said the wife in a low, even voice--still gazing into the
night--“I think you should finish it.”

“What are you saying?” the Lieutenant queried impatiently. He had heard
what she said, but thought he must have misunderstood.

“I think,” she repeated, “that you ought to go on with it.”

“Is it the barn you’re speaking of?” he asked, going up to her. Her
words had awakened a little hope in him, yet he was not certain that he
had understood her aright.

Fru Lagerlöf had been turning this matter over in her mind the whole
evening; she had said to herself that it would not be well for her
husband to go short in yet another undertaking. It might be more
expedient perhaps to give over the building scheme; but that would go
too hard with him. This was something which her father or her brother
could not understand; but she--his wife--understood.

To read the hearts of those she loved--that was as easy to Fru Lagerlöf
as reading a book; but to put her own thoughts into words in a moment
of deep feeling she could no more do than she could interpret Hebrew.

“I don’t think as Kalle does,” she said.

“What are you talking about?” The Lieutenant was almost trembling with
suspense. He dared not believe even now that she had come to his way of
thinking

Seeing how agitated he was, she did her utmost to make him understand.

“I don’t agree with Kalle,” she said. “I think you should finish
building the barn, and that it should stand where you want to have it.
And I think we ought to put a mortgage on the estate so that we can get
along without having to ask Father for more money.”

Now at last the Lieutenant understood. A great light broke in upon him.
If the wife and he were of one mind there were no difficulties ahead.
The foundation was solid and the walls rose firmly.

“God bless you, Louise!” he said.

After that they seemed to be more closely drawn to each other than
ever, held by new bonds of sympathy and tenderness. And the wife was
consulted at every step in the building work.

When at last the doors of the new barn were thrown open, and the cows
were ceremoniously led in and tied to their cribs; when the chickens
and geese, the turkeys and ducks were driven into their cages and the
calves into the stalls; when light streamed in through the large
windows and they themselves walked in clean, smooth passageways, they
felt that a good work had been done, and were glad they had both had a
share in it.




III

THE GARDEN


MAMSELLE LOVISA certainly loved and admired her brother the Lieutenant,
but she did not see why he need introduce so many changes and
newfangled things. She thought Mårbacka might better be left as it was
in their parents’ time. What went against her most was his wanting to
lay out gardens on all sides of the dwelling house.

She had been quite worried when he talked of deepening the river-bed,
and felt relieved when his plan miscarried. It was such a pretty sight,
when Ämtan overflowed and formed a lot of little shimmering lakes down
in the meadows! And she wailed a good deal when her brother cleared
away the field flowers. It had been a veritable feast for the eyes when
one field was white with daisies, another violet with heart’s-ease, and
a third yellow with buttercups. And it was a great pity the cows were
no longer sent to pasture in the woods. Everybody knew that such thick
cream and such yellow butter as one got when they wandered in the
forest were never seen when they grazed in the meadow.

In her father’s time, and for hundreds of years before, it had been
the custom to cut down the saplings, leave them on the ground to dry,
then burn them where they lay. The following year the ashes were sown
with rye, and, later, these burn-beaten clearings were covered with
wild strawberries and raspberries. Mamselle Lovisa naturally took it to
heart when her brother no longer burned such “falls.”

“Mark my words,” she said to him, “there’ll soon be an end to the wild
berries. Where will they grow if the woods are not burn-beaten? If all
were to do as you are doing, we’d never again be able to sit of a
summer’s evening and watch the pretty fires round the wooded hills.”

And she was not pleased with the new barn, either. Of course she did
not know very much, she said, but she had been told there was never any
comfort in a stone barn.

When the new barn was finished and the old one torn down, and the
Lieutenant talked of laying out a new garden, Mamselle Lovisa was
beside herself.

“I trust you know what you’re about,” she said. “A large garden
requires constant care, so you will have to figure on keeping a
gardener. Unless a garden is properly tended and kept clear of weeds,
one might better have none at all.”

The Lieutenant let her admonitions go into one ear and out of the
other. In the autumn he began tearing down the fences, which had been
there since Pastor Wennervik’s time--those enclosing the kitchen
garden and rose garden and those surrounding the front and back yards.

“Well, this is the end of all comfort and joy in this place!” sighed
Mamselle Lovisa. “Think how secure one felt when once inside all the
white fences! And what fun it was for the children to run out and open
the gates when company came!”

“It was less fun, though, for the one who had to keep so many fences
and gates in repair,” the Lieutenant replied.

He went right on with his work. When the fences were down he ploughed
up the old kitchen garden and the little rose garden, the old trampled
sward, the ground where the old barn had stood, and the calf ward, so
as to have the grounds cleared for the laying of the garden in the
spring.

“Is it true that you’re going to remove the kitchen garden?” said
Mamselle Lovisa. “To be sure I don’t know anything, but I have heard
folks say that when the apple trees are allowed to grow in the herb
beds they bear well, but if one plants sod round them one can’t expect
much fruit.”

“But dear little Lovisa, I thought you would be glad to have a real
garden!”

“Glad! Should I be glad that you are destroying the old Mårbacka? Soon
we won’t know the place at all.”

The Lieutenant thought his sister unusually contentious in this
instance, which was the more surprising because she had always loved
flowers and cared for all the house plants. But at that time, which was
shortly after her engagement had been broken and she was still
suffering from the disappointment, he could not say a harsh word to
her. All day long she paced the floor of her room and he could hear her
restless steps when he sat in the living room reading. He understood
that she was not just then quite mistress of herself, and thought it a
favourable sign that she took an interest in something outside her own
unhappiness. It was better that she should disapprove of his garden
than be continually brooding on whether she had been too hasty in
sending back the betrothal ring, or whether her fiancé had turned
against her because she had put a few leaves of whortleberry in Kaisa
Nilsdotter’s bridal-crown.

In those days there was an old landscape gardener living in Fryksdalen
who in his prime had been head gardener on various large estates. He
had the name of being a veritable wizard at garden making, and when
anyone contemplated laying out a new garden his advice and assistance
were sought.

The Lieutenant had asked him to come to Mårbacka, and in the spring, as
soon as the frost was out of the ground, the old man appeared with his
drawings and prints. A large corps of workmen was placed at his
command; quantities of bushes and trees ordered from the Göteborg
nurseries had come, and the big work was now started.

When the ground had been levelled the gardener and the Lieutenant went
about all day staking out grass plots and gravel walks. The old man
informed the Lieutenant that it was no longer the custom to follow the
severely regular French style. Now the paths must all be winding and
the borders and flower beds in easy, graceful lines. What he had in
mind for Mårbacka he called the English style; but the Lieutenant
rather suspected that the style was the old man’s own and not of
foreign origin.

In front they laid out a big circular lawn, on one side of which they
set out shrubbery in the shape of an egg, and on the other shrubbery in
the form of a horn of plenty, while in the middle of the round they
planted a weeping ash. Up toward the veranda they staked out a
star-shaped flower bed, placing as a guard about it four provence-rose
bushes--each on its own little round spot.

On the old sand-plot just below the kitchen windows they staked out a
large triangle and filled it with rich soil, in which they transplanted
the rose bushes from the old rose garden. For of roses they could never
have enough. Along the front of the house they set out a low hedge of
primroses, and two white-brier-rose bushes were given the places of
honour, the one before the parlour window, the other before the front
bedroom window.

The Lieutenant took such keen delight in this work that he went about
with the gardener all day, and Fru Lagerlöf would snatch long moments
from her sewing to go out and have a look at the garden; but Mamselle
Lovisa persistently kept to her room. This delightful spring work only
tended to increase her sadness. She would rather have had the old
trampled sward, with its one little tangle of snowberry bushes. All
these innovations seemed to her so unnecessary. But what she thought or
said was immaterial; just the same, folk had managed to live at
Mårbacka before. All these modern improvements only meant a lot of
bother and needless expense.

But the work went on despite her disapproval. Round the stable the
gardener planted a hedge of lilacs, also on three sides of the dwelling
house, while along the wing he set out a hedge of spiræas. That done,
the Lieutenant and the gardener went at the old Wennervik kitchen
garden. The fine apple trees they let stand where they were, but the
ground about them was laid out in the old man’s “English” style, with
winding gravel paths and grass plots arranged in various designs. With
much skill and calculation each grass plot was embellished with round,
oblong, or triangular beds and planted with perennials. Yellow cowslips
bordered blue iris, orange crown-imperials edged purple hyssop, and
encircling the red carnations was a wreath of pink bellis.

The flower beds of course were up round the dwelling house. Farther
back, on both the north and south sides, place was made for gooseberry
and currant bushes, for strawberry patches, for plum trees, pear trees,
and ever so many cherry trees. At the far southern end, quite a
distance away and well out of sight, lay the new kitchen garden, while
at the north end was a little birch grove, bordered by mountain ash and
bird-cherry trees. This grove the gardener included in his design, in
order to create at least the suggestion of a park. He intersected the
grove with many narrow winding gravel walks. In three places he cleared
away the trees to make room for tables and seats. The first open space
was an oblong spot with settees on all sides. Here the lady of the
house was to receive her guests, and it was to be called the Tea
Corner. The second was a square, with four seats round a table. That
was for the master and his company, and the old man jokingly dubbed it
the Toddy Corner. The third space had only a long, narrow bench. That
was the children’s domain, and was to be known as the Kiddies’ Corner.

But all this planting left Mamselle Lovisa indifferent. It may almost
be said that she scorned and detested it. She had not yet set foot in
the new garden.

Soon pale-green sprouts sprang up in the sod, the newly planted bushes
sent forth tender, shy little leaves, the perennial plants pushed
through the soil of the garden beds; oaks, chestnuts, and Lombardy
poplars, which had been planted in the old barn lot, began to bud and
show that they were alive.

In the midst of this busy time an unexpected difficulty arose. The old
gardener was obliged to go home for a few days, to see to his own
garden. That would not have mattered much but for the hot-bed he had
made in order to coax up some asters and gilly-flowers for the beds in
the front yard.

“Who is going to tend the hot-bed while I’m away?” said the old
gardener. “You know, Lieutenant, a hot-bed needs constant watching.”

“I’ll do it myself,” the Lieutenant replied; for by that time he
thought himself almost a master gardener. He let the old man show him
how to air and water the plants.

The morning the gardener left there was bright, strong sunshine. Along
in the forenoon the Lieutenant in alarm went up to the house to find
his wife. As she was nowhere about he rushed into his sister’s room.

“You’ll have to come and help me with the hot-bed, Lovisa,” he said.
Then, remembering that Mamselle Lovisa would not even look at his
garden and took no interest whatever in his work, he thought: “Oh,
well, it’s said now, and she can’t do more than refuse.”

But instead she eagerly got up and went out with him. Instantly she saw
the little plants, which were wilted and drooping, she exclaimed:

“The sun is too strong on them, they must be shaded.” Then she found
something with which to protect them, and the plants were saved.

The next day the Lieutenant had to attend a school examination. When
well on his way he suddenly remembered the hot-bed. There was the same
scorching heat that day as on the previous one. Now the little plants
would surely be burnt up, he thought.

The moment he got home he hurried over to the hot-bed. To his surprise
and delight all was well; the plants stood up, erect and sturdy. His
sister had thought of the poor little things which he had neglected. He
promptly decided not to forget to water and close the hot-bed that
evening. Sometime after supper he sprang up in alarm.

“Why, I’m forgetting the hot-bed! It should have been closed this long
while.”

Mamselle Lovisa said nothing, but let him go see for himself. He found
the glass lids down and the covers spread over them.

The following day the Lieutenant did not look at the hot-bed or give it
a thought. All the same, the little plants fared well. Mamselle Lovisa
weeded and loosened the soil round them, watered and tended them in
every way. It seemed rather strange that only she should think of the
hot-bed; but for her everything sown there would have died. Of course
she wished the old gardener would return and relieve her of the work;
but while he was away she had to go on with it.

He was gone longer than expected. In the meantime the plants were
growing almost too large for transplanting. There was no other course
than for Mamselle Lovisa to set them out in the flower beds herself.
When that much had been done, what could she do but go on weeding
and watering them all summer, until the gilly, petunia, aster, and
snap-dragon plants were in bloom!

And when the perfectly formed star before the front steps at Mårbacka
appeared resplendent with bright colours, then in some mysterious way
the pain was gone from Mamselle Lovisa’s wounded heart. The little
plants had requited the loving care she had bestowed upon them. They
had given her a new interest in life, a new field of activity.

Lieutenant Lagerlöf did not have to engage a head gardener for
Mårbacka; Mamselle Lovisa had inherited the old Wennervik bent, and it
was she who took care of the garden. The flowers were her faithful
friends; they loved her as she loved them. People wondered how she
could get them to bloom and glow as in no other garden. They did not
know that the flowers had caught colour and sweetness from her vanished
dream of happiness.




IV

THE ROOF TRUSSES


WHEN Lieutenant Lagerlöf and his little daughters walked in the garden
or out in the fields they often talked of what they would do if the
King came to Mårbacka.

In those days the King used to drive through Värmland several times a
year on his way to and from Norway, and he had to stop somewhere for
refreshment and rest. Most frequently he stayed over in Karlstad, at
the Governor’s house, and it was also his wont to honour with a royal
visit the great manors which lay along his route, and where they could
conveniently entertain him.

Of course there was not the least likelihood that the King would come
to a little unknown place like Mårbacka, which, to boot, lay far from
the great highway. But that did not trouble the Lieutenant and his
little girls. It would not have been such fun perhaps to talk about
this had there been any chance of the King’s really coming. Now it was
only a pleasure to build in fancy a triumphal arch for His Majesty, and
strew flowers in his way as he drove up. The little girls wondered if
they should dress in white when the King came and the Lieutenant
generously promised them new white frocks made by the best sempstress
in East Ämtervik for the grand occasion.

The Lieutenant and the children pictured to themselves how the King,
when nearing Mårbacka, would suddenly shade his eyes with his hand so
as to see better.

“What is that great white building over there in the meadow?” he would
ask. “Have they two churches in this parish?”

“No, your Majesty,” the Lieutenant would then reply (for of course he
was to ride with the King), “that white building is not a church, it is
my cow-barn.”

Then the King would look at him in wide-eyed wonder, and say:

“By Jove! You must be a deucedly clever fellow, Eric Gustaf, to have
built yourself a barn like that!”

How they were to house the King and all his retinue in the little
one-story dwelling--that was an almost unsolvable problem. The
Lieutenant had often talked of building another story, and they were
all agreed that when that was finished it would be an easy matter to
entertain the King. Even then they probably would be a bit cramped for
space. The Lieutenant and his wife might have to spend the night in the
hay-loft, and the children--well, they could sleep in the rabbit hutch.

Now that about the rabbit hutch tickled the little girls immensely. And
they wondered what the King would say about the garden. Of course he
would marvel to find away back here in the farming country a garden
laid out in the true English manner. At that, the Lieutenant would
immediately send word to the old gardener and hearten him with the good
news that the King had praised his flower beds and gravel paths.

And then when the King was leaving Mårbacka he would present Fru
Lagerlöf with a gold brooch and Mamselle Lovisa with a gold bracelet,
and the old housekeeper would receive a large shawl-pin of silver.
Before stepping into his carriage, His Majesty would shake hands with
the Lieutenant, and say:

“Thanks and honour to you, Eric Gustaf Lagerlöf! It is but a modest bit
of my realm that is in your keeping, but I see that you take good care
of it.”

Those words the Lieutenant would remember with joy as long as he lived.
He and his children had right merry times on these little excursions
into the land of make-believe. It was a pity, though, that the royal
visit could not really and truly come about until the Lieutenant had
built a second story.

Then, lo and behold, at the close of the eighteen-sixties, when the
Lieutenant had finished with everything else, he was ready to start
remodelling the house. The royal visit apart, they were rather closely
housed in the old one-story dwelling. The Lieutenant had already made
some alterations. Eight or ten years back he had cut out larger window
openings and had done away with the small-paned sashes. He had also
put up new tile-stoves, papered the walls of the parlour and living
room, and built a large veranda in place of the old porch.

Now there were to be still further improvements. The whole roof was to
be torn off, the trusses raised, and the timber walls heightened. The
year before he had had a couple of good carpenters at work on the place
preparing the new roof trusses, so that the roof could be raised and
covered as quickly as possible. The workmen had but just finished the
trusses when the Lieutenant got word that his father-in-law had passed
away. This was a sad loss and a heavy blow as well. The Lieutenant had
lost his main prop and stay. Hereafter he would have no one but himself
to depend on. Now out of his estate he must pay all contracted debts.
His sons were then nearly grown and must soon be sent to the University
of Upsala; therefore he thought it best to postpone the building work
for a year or so.

But what one puts off is likely to be left undone. Fresh obstacles
continually loomed in the way of this work. One year the Lieutenant was
ill, and the next he had to help a brother-in-law who had once been
well-to-do but must now have a yearly stipend. While the Lieutenant had
been labouring to build up his property the years had passed without
his noting them. He was now a man of fifty, and the old daring spirit
of enterprise had perhaps slipped away from him.

It was with no light heart he relinquished his cherished plan of
rebuilding the house. That was to have been his crowning work. All his
life he had dreamed of erecting a fine manor-house on his beloved
Mårbacka.

The great piles of timber and the finished roof trusses lay in the
backyard for many years. Whenever the Lieutenant walked past them he
turned his head away; he could not bear to look at them. His little
daughters had been so very happy when he started on the roof trusses,
and not altogether on account of the “royal visit.” It was perhaps of
more importance to them that they should have a real salon to dance in,
and that the house should have two stories, and be as grand as
Iron-Master Wallroth’s Gårdsjö or Engineer Noreen’s country seat. They
grew uneasy over the delay, year after year, and one of the girls
finally mustered the courage to ask her father when he was going to put
up those roof trusses.

“I’m afraid never, my child!” When he said this his face twitched and
there was a strange catch in his voice. Then, quickly recovering
himself, he added, banteringly:

“But it doesn’t matter now, my girl. They are building a railway to
Norway, and hereafter the King won’t come asking for a night’s lodging,
either at Mårbacka or any other manor in Värmland.”




WORKDAYS AND FÊTE-DAYS




I

NOONING


LIEUTENANT LAGERLÖF believed that children, in order to grow up healthy
and strong and become useful and capable men and women, should above
all things acquire the habit of nooning. With that object in mind,
always, after the midday meal, he would take the two youngest children
down to the farm-office, which was in another building a few steps from
the house.

The office was a large room, and probably looked about the same as in
the days of the Mårbacka clergymen, when it had been their study. At
the far end, under a window, there was a black leather lounge, and
before it an oblong table. Along one side-wall stood a bedstead, a
black leather-seated chair, a large black walnut writing table, and a
high chest of drawers, while at the other side stood another bed and
black leather chair and a tile stove. On the wall, beyond the stove,
hung three fowling pieces, a seal-skin game-bag, a large horse-pistol,
a couple of powder horns, and a fencing foil which crossed a broken
sabre. In the midst of this armoury rested a huge pair of elk antlers.
Down by the door, on one side, there was a stationary clothes
cupboard, on the other side, a bookcase. At the bottom of the cupboard
reposed the Lieutenant’s iron-bound oak chest, the one the Paymaster of
the Regiment had used, and which was a bit charred on one corner.

In the bookcase the Lieutenant kept his big ledgers, and there, also,
were the school books of two generations. Many annuals of the _European
Feuilleton_ were crowded in with Homer, Cicero, and Livy. Histories of
Peter the Great and Frederick the Wise had been relegated hither on
account of their common drab cardboard bindings, also the works of
Wilhelm von Braun--though not because of their covers but for other
reasons. On the floor lay surveyors’ instruments from the time the
Lieutenant had assisted in the shifting of boundary lines; also some
boxes of fishing tackle and odds and ends.

First thing, on coming into the office, the Lieutenant and his little
daughters had to drive out the flies. Doors and windows were thrown
wide open. The Lieutenant caught up a towel for the chase, and the
little girls took off their aprons and went to beating the air. They
climbed on to chairs and tables, hunted and swatted, while the buzzing
flies flew hither and yon, as if determined not to go. However, in the
end they were cleared out, and windows and doors were closed.

But there was one fly they called the Old Office Fly; she was used to
the daily chase, and knew enough to keep out of the way while it went
on. When all was quiet and peaceful again, she would come forth from
her hiding place and seat herself on the ceiling.

No fresh chase was started for her. The Lieutenant and the children
knew that she was too canny for them. They could never get rid of her!
So they went on to the next thing to be done before nooning. The girls
arranged two leather pillows and a down pillow on the lounge as a
head-rest for the Lieutenant; whereupon he stretched himself out, shut
his eyes, and simulated sleep.

Then, with wild shrieks, the children threw themselves upon him. He
tossed them off as if they were little balls of yarn, but back they
came like playful puppies. They pulled his whiskers, ruffled his hair,
and clambered up on to the sofa, playing all sorts of pranks on him.

When the Lieutenant thought the children had had enough of play he
clapped his hands once, and said:

“It’s over now.”

Little good that did! The children kept right on; again and again they
crawled up on to the sofa, were flung off, and came bounding
back--shrieking and making a fearful racket.

When that had gone on for some little time, the Lieutenant clapped
twice and said: “It’s quite over now.”

Nor did that have any effect. The same performance was repeated amid
shrieks and laughter, until the Lieutenant presently clapped his hands
three times, and said:

“Now it is really and truly over.”

The two children instantly hushed their noise, and each crept into her
own bed to sleep.

After a little the Lieutenant began to snore. His snores were not very
loud, but they were enough to keep the two children, who were to
acquire the habit of nooning, awake.

The youngsters were not allowed to get out of bed or speak to each
other, but had to lie perfectly still. Their eyes, meanwhile, wandered
round the room. Gazing at the rag mats on the floor, they recognized
their mother’s and their aunt’s old dresses, which had been cut up for
carpets. They looked at the portrait of General Malmberg, which hung on
the wall between two battle canvasses, at the ink-well and pen, at the
antlers and game-bags, at the foil and the famous gun called the
“harekiller.” They traced the figures in the quilt, they counted the
stars on the wall-paper, the nail-heads along the floor, and the checks
in the curtains. The hour seemed dreadfully long! They heard the merry
voices of the other children, who were so big they did not have to take
a midday nap, but ran about--happy and free--devouring cherries and
gooseberries and green apples!

The sole hope of the two little girls was the “office fly.” She buzzed
and buzzed round the Lieutenant’s face, making as much noise as she
could. If only she kept at it long enough she’d wake him up!




II

MAMSELLE BRORSTRÖM


THE undergraduates at the _Gymnasium_ of Karlstad had been unusually
quiet in the beginning of the autumn semester. They had not started any
fights with the street boys, or been up to any other deviltry. The
whole city was surprised, pleased, and thankful, though no doubt people
felt at the same time that something was lacking.

Then, as it drew on toward autumn Fair-time, when folk from all parts
of Värmland were coming to the capital of the province, the students
felt they must do something to maintain their reputation. Now it was
not merely a question of Karlstad, but of all Värmland. After due
deliberation, when various propositions had been presented and
rejected, a schoolboy named Fredrik Sandberg was summoned to appear
before the collegians.

Fredrik Sandberg obeyed orders, of course, for in those days it never
would have done for the schoolboys to defy the collegians, who were
their overlords. Nor would it have been well for the one who attempted
to evade a summons from that quarter!

When Fredrik came the students togged him out in frilled shirt and
stock, satin waistcoat of large flowered pattern, gray trousers with
foot-straps, blue swallow-tail coat with silver buttons, and patent
leather shoes. His hair was then curled and arranged in a forelock,
gloves and walking stick were put into his hands, and a tall stove-pipe
hat with curved brim topped it all.

If only Fredrik Sandberg had not been so small that the trousers hung
in pleats, the coat tails almost trailed on the ground, and the hat
went down on his ears, he would have been as fine a dandy as ever trod
a city street. Thus arrayed, he was ordered off to Mamselle
Brorström’s.

When Fredrik Sandberg entered the attic room where Mamselle Brorström
lived, he found her standing before her tile-stove making waffles. Her
attire was a bit so-so--just a petticoat and undervest. The little
schoolboy thought to himself that never had he seen such arms and legs,
such hands and feet, and such a torso!

“My name is Fredrik Sandberg,” he said by way of introduction, “and I
would most humbly beg that I may be permitted to invite Mamselle
Brorström to the Fair Ball at the Masonic Lodge.”

Mamselle Brorström was not exactly what would be termed “in society,”
and had surely never thought of going to a fair ball. But now, being
invited by an elegant cavalier, she could hardly refuse. So, curtsying
to Fredrik Sandberg, she thanked him and said she felt highly
honoured, and would be most happy to attend the ball.

The boy was pleased at being so well received, for it might have turned
out quite otherwise. He ran back to the students as quickly as
possible, and reported all that had taken place.

A week later Fredrik Sandberg was again ordered to appear before the
collegians, and again dressed up as before, and sent to Mamselle
Brorström.

This time he found her standing before her looking-glass trying on a
red tulle dress. Her neck and arms were bare and she turned and twisted
impatiently, apparently in a dreadful humour.

The little boy stared at the huge woman, who was twice as tall as he,
twice as broad, and twice as strong. He gazed at the thick arms
sticking out from the sleeveless red tulle bodice, and the enormous
legs showing below the short skirts; he looked at her coarse face,
copper-coloured from constant exposure to fire--for she was always
making waffles--and he looked at her black tousled hair standing out
like a bush round her head; he saw the fiery gleam in her blood-shot
eyes and heard the thundering tones of her raucous voice. The boy
wanted to cut and run, but having been sent there by the college
students and knowing what disobedience to that authority meant, he
bowed to Mamselle Brorström, and said:

“I most humbly beg that I may have the pleasure of the first waltz at
the Fair Ball.”

Mamselle Brorström had been rather repentant and thoughtful that
morning, and had wondered if she really ought to go to the ball. She
would no doubt have put all thought of it out of her mind if Fredrik
Sandberg had not come and begged for the first waltz. But now that she
was certain of a dancing partner she was again in good humour. She
assured Fredrik Sandberg that she felt both favoured and honoured, and
that nothing would afford her greater pleasure than to let him dance
with her.

That was the very day of the ball. And in the evening Mamselle
Brorström, arrayed in her red tulle dress (than which nothing could be
prettier, she thought) appeared at the Masonic Lodge among Karlstaders
and Fair visitors. Stalking through the ladies’ dressing room into the
grand ballroom, she sat herself down on one of the small cushioned
seats along the wall.

People stared, but she did not mind. Having been invited, she had as
good a right as any one else to dance at the Fair Ball. She noticed
that the other ladies all had acquaintances to chat with, but this did
not trouble her; when once the music struck up for the dance, they’d
see that she had as fine a partner as any of them.

The regiment band began to play. She saw the foundry clerks step up to
the founderers’ daughters, the lieutenants to the officers’ ladies, and
the shop clerks to the shopkeepers’ girls--each took his partner. Soon
everyone was on the floor whirling round--everyone except Mamselle
Brorström, who sat waiting for Fredrik Sandberg.

The collegians were on the platform with the musicians. They had a good
view of Mamselle Brorström in her red tulle, sitting all alone in the
middle of the long row of wall seats, where the one she was waiting for
might easily find her.

The wife of the Governor put up her lorgnette and wondered who that
large, conspicuous looking woman was. The daughters of the founderers
stuck up their noses at her, while the young ladies of the nobility
marvelled that a person of that sort should come to a Fair Ball.

Mamselle Brorström meanwhile remained seated in the one place. Fredrik
Sandberg did not put in an appearance and no one else seemed to think
of asking her to dance. There was a supper, and after that more
dancing. The fine folk were now leaving and the gentlemen began to look
a bit flushed; but Mamselle Brorström still sat on.

Then at last Tanner Grunder stepped up and asked for a polka.

“’Tis high time!” said Mamselle Brorström in a voice loud enough to be
heard all over the ballroom. And those words became a catch phrase in
Värmland.

The tanner had been in a side room playing cards the whole evening, and
had just come out for a little spin. As she was the only lady
disengaged he naturally went over to her--not knowing, of course, her
state of mind.

As Mamselle Brorström stood up to fling herself into the dizzy whirl,
Tanner Grunder, to be polite and obliging, said:

“What is Mamselle Brorström’s pleasure--to dance forward or backward?”

“’Tis all one to me just so it goes,” she answered.

This, too, was heard all over the hall, and those words also became a
saying in Värmland.

The day after the ball Fredrik Sandberg was again summoned by the
collegians, and once again he was togged out and sent to Mamselle
Brorström.

He found her standing by the stove, as usual, making waffles. That day
she was not attired in red tulle but only in her petticoat and
undervest. The schoolboy thought that never had he seen such a
sour-looking face, such strong arms and formidable fists. The words he
was to speak wanted to stick in his throat. But just outside the door
stood three of the most dangerous collegians, and Fredrik knew what it
would mean to get into the bad graces of the powers that be!

“I most humbly beg to know whether Mamselle Brorström had a pleasant
time last evening at the ball,” he said, and made a low bow.

How Fredrik Sandberg got out of the room, across the hall, down the
stairs, and into the street, he never knew. Nor did the three
collegians who had been lurking behind the door know how they had been
assisted down the stairs. It was well they were there, so that Fredrik
was not alone on this treat, which proved to be more than enough for
them all.

This episode was imprinted indelibly in the mind of Lieutenant
Lagerlöf, who at the time it occurred was a lad attending school at
Karlstad. And of an evening, as he sat in his rocker, he would tell the
tale to his children. Though he was himself the kindest and gentlest of
men, the mad pranks of schoolboys were always a source of amusement to
him.




III

RIDING TO “BLÅKULLA”


IN Grandmother Lagerlöf’s time, when the paupers of the community were
taken into families and cared for, there was an old wardswoman at
Mårbacka who on winter nights used to sleep in the kitchen--though
goodness knows the room was crowded enough anyhow, with the housekeeper
and five maids all sleeping there! So at the first signs of summer she
would betake herself to the barn-loft, where she had found a good
comfortable bed in an old discarded sledge, which in bygone winters had
been used for carting pig-iron from the smithies in Bergslagerna to the
Kymsberg Iron Works.

There for several weeks she had slept in peace and quiet. Then, one
night, she was awakened by the sledge moving. She sat bolt upright and
looked round. Outside, the night was almost as light as day, but in the
barn where the poor old woman lay it was pitch dark, so that she could
not see anything. Thinking that she had only been dreaming, she sank
back upon her pillow and was soon slumbering again.

But strange to say, she had no more than got to sleep when the sledge
began to move again. This time it not only gave a little lurch but
went gliding along the floor. Though it moved kind of slowly and
cautiously, there was no mistaking that there was life in it.

The old woman sat up and gripped the side of the sledge with both
hands. Her hair rose and her jaw fell.

“Merciful God!” she gasped, “it’s crawling!”

But how in the world could such a thing happen? Could it be that an old
sledge which had carried pig-iron winter after winter between
Bergslagerna and Kymsberg grew restless at night, and must bestir
itself a bit once in a while?

The sledge moved faster; now it went bumpety-bump over the uneven
floor, and scudded across piles of hay and straw as if taking plunges
into deep gulches and flights up steep hills.

“O merciful God! Merciful God!” cried the woman.

But invoking the name of the Lord did not stop the sledge; it ran right
on the whole length of the barn-loft, till it struck the wall.

There it must surely stand still, she thought. But no indeed! As soon
as it recovered its breath, so to speak, it began to back toward the
corner where it first stood.

The wardswoman said later that if in that instant she had not guessed
what was wrong with the sledge she surely would have lost her wits.

Oh, no, it was not the old Bergslag journeys haunting the pig-iron
sledge--someone had “greased” it! Some witch-hag on the farm or in the
district (she didn’t care to mention any names, or even think
them) had taken it into her head that she could ride to Blåkulla, the
Witches’-kitchen, with more ease and comfort in the old sledge than on
a broom-stick, an oven-rake, or a barn door. Perhaps the wicked witch
did not know the wardswoman slept in the sledge. In the stress of the
moment there was no time to figure on just how it had all come about.
But this much was certain: the sledge wanted to be out and off, and it
was she--the wardswoman--it was taking to the Witches’ hell instead of
the right one.

Lord o’ Mercy! But for the strong barn wall she would already be flying
over the village toward the church.

Meanwhile the sledge kept backing. She knew well enough that that was
only in order to make a fresh start to break through. Once outside, it
would go shooting through the air over tree-tops and mountain ranges.
She would be flying above shining lakes and rivers, without the least
fear of tumbling into them; she would circle round the church steeple
like a jackdaw, and fly on beyond Stor Kil and Grav parishes; but where
she would land she hated to think on.

Lord o’ Mercy! The sledge was rushing forward again. There was no doubt
that sledge could fly if once it got out into the open; it was making
for the wall at terrific speed. The old woman, positive now that the
wall would give way, lay down again so as not to be scraped off in the
middle when the sledge cut through the boards. This time it struck
hard. Oh, what a bump! Again the wall resisted. Now, if only the sledge
had the sense to see that it couldn’t get anywhere, and stand still!

But don’t for a moment imagine it! Once more it began to back. That
sledge must have been greased with real witch-oil. If it made a third
attempt it would surely succeed. Whatever would she do when she got in
amongst witches and all the Hosts of Darkness! To be sure she had heard
tell of such, but she had never wanted to believe in them. There is so
much one would rather not believe until one has seen for oneself
whether it is true.

“Merciful Lord, lead me not into temptation,” she prayed. All her life
she had endured poverty and contempt without a murmur. But were she now
to be offered riches and power, would she be able to resist? Or, were
she to learn the magic words that cure sickness in humans and animals,
or the ones that make the ground yield good harvests, or those that
awaken love in young folk, could she withstand the temptation to use
them? Might she only be granted strength to rise above temptation and
so preserve her soul unto salvation.

Just then the sledge took a third lunge. Now it tore ahead, creating a
rush of wind that whizzed about her ears. She shut her eyes lest she
turn giddy, for in the wink of an eyelid she knew she would be soaring
high above the earth--high as the lark.

Crash! Now, surely, the wall had given way....

But, thanks be to God! the good board wall still held; it was only the
sledge that had broken down. With that, it must have lost all zest for
travel. The sledge having come to a dead stop, the wardswoman managed
to crawl out and drop down on a heap of straw, to rest after her
perilous ride. When in the morning she told it all to the maids and it
eventually came to the ears of Grandmother Lagerlöf, the latter thought
it sounded a bit queer. Though Grandmother was herself a firm believer
in the supernatural, there had to be some semblance of reason and
probability behind it. That one could ride to _Blåkulla_ on a light
summer’s night, and in a sleigh at that, was something unheard of.
Grandmother, of course, went down to the barn and examined the sledge.
Finding a couple of long ropes attached to it, she immediately summoned
the stableboy and two or three of his companions. After questioning the
boys thoroughly, she gave them a good dressing down.


This, too, was one of the Lieutenant’s boy-prank yarns. There were many
more up his sleeve; but when he had told this and the one about
Mamselle Brorström, Fru Lagerlöf would say:

“Now that is enough for this evening. It’s time for the children to say
Good-night, and go to bed.”




IV

BELLMAN BALLADS


AT SIX-THIRTY every morning Nurse made a fire in the children’s room,
and at seven o’clock the children had to rise and start dressing. When
they were ready, say at about half after seven, and the beds had been
hurriedly made, a tray was sent up from the kitchen with bowls of gruel
and large pieces of buttered _knäckebröd._ This was the _little_
breakfast. Then, until eight, they sat at a large table by the window
and glanced over their lessons. The nursery had to serve as schoolroom,
there being no other place available.

On the stroke of eight books were closed. The children then put on
their wraps and went out in the half-dark winter morning--whatever the
weather. They hurried down to the pond first thing, to see whether
there was ice for skating, or, in lieu of that, went sledding on the
driveway. If there was nothing else they could do, they ran down to the
barn to see the baby rabbits and romp with the sheep-dog.

A little before nine they had _big_ breakfast, which usually consisted
of eggs, or griddle-cakes, or fried herring with boiled potatoes, or
black pudding with salt pork and cream gravy. At breakfast the family
did not sit at the big table, but each person, in turn, helped himself
and then sat down at one of the side tables.

At nine sharp one had to be through with the meal, for at that hour
lessons began. Then it was back to the nursery again to sit at the long
table reading, writing, and figuring until noon. The little girls had a
governess now--Ida Melanoz, eldest daughter of Sexton Melanoz, who had
her father’s good brain and teaching ability.

At twelve o’clock dinner was served at the round dining table. One of
the little girls said grace before the meal, the other after it. Then,
rising from table, they kissed Mother’s hand and Father’s hand, and
said: “Thanks for the food.” It was never quiet during the dinner hour.
Lieutenant Lagerlöf kept the ball of chatter rolling. He could always
find something to talk about. If nothing more thrilling had happened
than his meeting an old woman in the lane, he would make a whole story
out of the incident.

From one to two the children were again out of doors. But they often
went in a few minutes before the play hour was up, so as to run through
their lessons for the afternoon session, which was from two to four.
Afterwards, they would read the lessons for the next day. They were
never allowed to sit at their studies later than five o’clock, when
they must go out-doors again. Now they were off to some distant
coasting hill. At one time they had a big ram to drive, and that,
of course, was great sport. When they got back to the house a pleasant
hour awaited them. A log fire crackled in the living room and on the
folded card table stood a plate of sandwiches and a pitcher of
unfermented beer. To sit or lie before the fire while munching their
sandwiches--that was something the youngsters enjoyed hugely. They
chattered and planned all sorts of things. It was the only hour of the
day they had to themselves.

When the fire burned low, the lamp on the round table over by the sofa
was lit. Fru Lagerlöf now took her little daughters in hand, and taught
them to sew, crochet, and knit. She had a volume of Hans Andersen’s
fairy tales, and when she thought the work had gone well she would
reward the children by reading or narrating “The Travelling Companion,”
or “The Tinder-box,” or “The Wild Swans.” Besides, there were pretty
and amusing illustrations in that book, and to look at those was almost
as much fun as to hear the stories.

At eight o’clock supper was served, and then the Lieutenant appeared.
Up to that hour he had been at the farm-office poring over his ledgers.

And now, after the long work-filled day, one could at last relax. The
children put away their needlework, and the Lieutenant, sitting back in
his rocking-chair, began to tell schoolboy yarns like the one about
Mamselle Brorström, or else he related his memories of the glorious
Jenny Lind as _Norma_ or the _Daughter of the Regiment_, or of Emily
Högquist as the _Maid of Orleans._ When at times he did not feel like
talking, he would ask Fru Lagerlöf or Mamselle Lovisa to read aloud
from Tegnér. Anything more beautiful than “Fritiof’s Saga” he thought
had never been written. He would rather have been the Lund professor
who sang of Fritiof’s and Ingeborg’s love, than Emperor of France or
Tsar of Russia. He was also an admirer of Runeberg, whose tales of
“Surgeon Stål” and epic poems he enjoyed hearing. But he did not like
it if any one said the Finnish poet was greater than Tegnér.

Sometimes (and that was the best fun of all) he would sit down at the
old piano and strike a few chords, then call out:

“Come, children, let’s sing Bellman!”

The girls needed no coaxing, they were over by the piano in a jiffy.
Then, with high glee, they let loose on Bellman! They always began with
“Old Man Noah” and “Joachim of Babylon,” then followed “Father Movitz”
and “Mother at Tuppen,” and they sang of “Dancing Master Mollberg, and
His Misadventures in Rostock Tavern.”

The Lieutenant pounded out the accompaniments, and hummed the air, to
mark the time and carry the tune. But the children sang at the top of
their voices, and could be heard all over the house. Here were indeed
life and merriment for them after the day’s work! They understood very
little of what they sang, but the melodies put them in a glow and
livened their spirits. Ah, how sweet it sounded when _Ulla_ danced in
spangles, veil and fringe! or when _Fredman_ sang: “’Tis as far to
Monday as from north to south.” And what could be funnier than when the
ever-hapless _Mollberg_ jumped into the vat where _Grogshop-Mother_
soaked her stockfish, or when at the great boating-picnic the
party-cake came on garnished with sugar, cinnamon, and anchovies!

But what delighted the children above everything was that they might
sing as loud as ever they wished. The Lieutenant never corrected them
or interrupted to remind them that there were such things as voice
modulation and singing in unison. They thought they sang Bellman just
as he should be sung.

On the wall above the piano sat Karl Mikael (Bellman) himself, with his
lute. Now and then, the Lieutenant looked up at him, as if expecting a
smile of approval from that incomparable lyrist and singer.

But once when Lieutenant Lagerlöf and the children were having a
Bellman-sing, it happened that Colour-Sergeant von Wachenfeldt was
there, sitting in his usual corner, chatting with Mamselle Lovisa.

“Isn’t it strange that not one of the children has a voice?” Mamselle
Lovisa remarked to the Sergeant in a half-whisper.

“Yes,” replied the Sergeant in a low tone. “That they haven’t singing
voices they can’t help, but they might at least make use of their
ears!”

“It seems extraordinary, when both parents are musical, don’t you think
so, Wachenfeldt? I can’t understand how Gustaf endures it!”

“He does not hear it as it sounds to us,” said the Sergeant. “He loves
those children.”

“People are wont to speak of seeing with the eyes of love,” observed
Mamselle Lovisa, “and there may be such a thing as hearing with the
ears of love....”

“Be sure of that!” responded the Colour-Sergeant, who knew whereof he
spoke.

One of the little singers chanced to overhear those remarks, and
repeated them to the others, and perhaps it was due to that that the
Bellman “concerts” at Mårbacka were suddenly discontinued.

But long afterward--aye, always--the love of the Bellman songs lived in
the hearts of the Mårbacka children. They loved them not only for their
humour and pathos and their haunting beauty; but the faintest tone from
the Bellman lute called up memories of the never-failing love and
tenderness that had made their childhood such a happy one!




V

BOYS AND GIRLS


IN THE summer of 1866 there was an unusually large number of children
at Mårbacka. Besides Daniel and Johan Lagerlöf, sons of the house,
there were Teodor, Otto, and Hugo Hammargren, cousins on the paternal
side, who, with their parents, were spending the whole summer at
Mårbacka. Ernst and Klas Schenson, cousins on the maternal side, had
also come for the summer. But, indeed, they were not all! Herman,
Bernhard, and Edvin Milén of the neighbouring farm, must also be
counted as members of the company, and Adolf Noreen of Herrestad came
over two or three times a week to play with the boys. And of course
there were Anna, Selma, and Gerda Lagerlöf, though Gerda, who was only
three years old, hardly counted; nor were Anna and Selma of any
importance when there were so many boys around.

That summer the lads had hit upon a jollier and more satisfying pastime
than any of previous years. The first few weeks they spent in the usual
way--picking berries, lying on the grass, swinging in the rope-swing,
shooting arrows, pitching quoits, and playing leap-frog. But after a
time they wearied of these petty diversions, and talked of taking up
some serious and productive work. They had an eye to a bit of woodland
just beyond the avenue, which was bounded on the west by the road
ditch, on the east by towering Åsberget, on the north by a stone wall,
and on the south by a deep gravel pit; so that the whole area, which
covered about one sixteenth of an acre, lay quite detached and well
secluded.

On closer inspection, the boys discovered that the land had a bountiful
supply of rocks, and its vegetation consisted mostly of juniper bushes,
spruce saplings, and bracken. At the northern end there was a little
brook, which ran dry in high summer, and along its shores grew some
fine alder bushes. In the crevices of the mountain wall grew polypody,
a kind of fern to which the boys attached great value. At the south end
there were four large spruces, while in the midst of the territory
stood a tall, thickly branched pine.

The whole region was evidently devoid of culture, its only inhabitants
being squirrels, woodpeckers, and ants. Now the boys thought this
wilderness ought to have the benefit of the blessings of civilization,
and decided to emigrate and settle there.

Their first move was to stake out their homesteads. Teodor Hammargren,
who was sixteen years of age and the nominal head of the expedition,
claimed a towering rock, which afforded him a splendid view of the
whole country. Daniel Lagerlöf, who was fifteen--and next in age and
standing--appropriated the four large spruces and the fine rock wall
behind them. Johan Lagerlöf and Otto Hammargren, who were schoolfellows
and good pals, took joint possession of the northernmost tract with the
dried-out brook and alder grove. Ernst Schenson, who was but twelve,
contented himself with a scraggy rock. The others wondered what joy he
could have of that. His brother, Klas, who was only a little chap, also
chose a rock; but he seemed to have got the better position, for he had
a shading juniper close by. Hugo Hammargren claimed as his portion the
solitary pine, which no one begrudged him. Herman Milén, aged ten,
found a big uprooted spruce lying with its roots in the air and its
trunk full of branches. His little brothers, Bernhard and Edvin, who
were twins and only eight, came near not getting anything at all;
however, they were each finally allotted the stump of a tree. Adolf
Noreen had not been at Mårbacka the day the land was apportioned, and
there was great consternation when he finally appeared and demanded his
share of the spoils; for by that time every available spot had already
been taken. Luckily, Teodor Hammargren hit upon the thought of allowing
him a shelf of rock in the mountain wall. And with that, peace was
restored.

But if Anna and Selma had entertained any hopes of owning homes in the
settlement they were sadly mistaken. Why, they were just girls, and it
never even occurred to the boys that they might wish to be included.

The lads were having such good times all by themselves in their new
colony! Teodor Hammargren carried up moss to his tower to make him a
comfortable seat. He had built a stone stairway by which he could
easily pass up and down. Daniel Lagerlöf had cleared the ground between
the spruces and the rock wall, and fitted up a salon with moss-covered
stone seats along three sides. His was the most comfortable and
attractive place of all. Johan and Otto made for themselves a
semi-circular moss sofa in among their tangle of alders. That was also
considered a very desirable location. Ernst Schenson made him a wide
moss-covered lounge, with his big rock as back-rest; but his brother
Klas was a little do-nothing, who just sprawled on the ground under his
juniper bush and didn’t bother to drag stones and moss for a bench.
Hugo Hammargren had begged some board-ends from the Lieutenant’s
carpenter and nailed them in a crotch of his pine, so that he had a
grand seat. Adolf Noreen made a moss bed on his shelf of rock, where he
enjoyed solid comfort when once he had clambered up. Herman Milén had
dug a cave for himself under his uprooted tree, and even the small
twins had spread a bit of moss over their stumps.

But Anna and Selma had nowhere to build and nothing to furnish. They
wandered about the farm utterly deserted, not knowing what to do to
amuse themselves.

The boys, meanwhile, had more and more fun as their commune developed.
They soon found it necessary to have a regular administration and
judiciary, and elected Teodor Hammargren High Chieftain and Judge.
Daniel Lagerlöf was appointed Master of the Mint, and had to issue
paper currency. Johan became bailiff and Otto Hammargren petty
constable.

Now that they had money to do with the boys began to buy and sell stone
and gravel, moss and earth. Some did a brisk trade and grew rich; but
Hugo Hammargren and Herman Milén were regular spendthrifts, and they
were moreover guilty of appropriating ferns from another’s estate. The
bailiff had to arrest them and put them in the jail--an old smithy
which lay conveniently at the roadside.

Anna and Selma still went about the farm by themselves. Anna averred
that the next time the boys asked her to crochet a ball for them she’d
say NO. Nor would she help them make taffy. And Selma, who was only
seven, didn’t know what to do to get even with the boys; but she could
at least refuse to let them haul gravel in her little cart.

Life up at the colony was so thrilling the boys all declared they had
never had such good sport. They sat in councils and discussed the
affairs of State; they voted to build roads and to construct a great
stone bridge across the ditch, in order to connect the colony with the
outer world. All the lads over twelve years of age were to do the
road-breaking and stone-cutting, while the younger ones were to haul
gravel. But afterward it seemed that Hugo Hammargren and Herman
Milén would not help with the work, and from that arose many grave
complications. Hugo and Herman, since they had no respect for law and
order, were now looked upon as the black sheep of the colony. Even the
jail had no terrors for them! So it was difficult to know just what
course of procedure to follow in their case.

Anna and Selma down on the farm tried to amuse themselves by shooting
with the boys’ bows-and-arrows and pitching their quoits. They said
they had quite as much fun in winter, when the boys were away at
school. Anna vowed that never again would she let any boy look at the
big doll her aunt had given her for Christmas, which was over two feet
tall, and wore shoes and stockings, corset and crinoline, and had a bed
of its own, with sheets and pillowcases, and a trunk for its clothes,
and everything.

Up at the colony things were flourishing. One fine day at a town
meeting it was moved that a public house be opened. The motion was
carried, and Master of the Mint Daniel Lagerlöf was elected keeper of
the tavern, because he had the roomiest dwelling.

The new boniface must have found it rather tiring trying to satisfy the
demands of his customers for home-brewed ginger beer, wild raspberries,
green apples, and polypody. Of a sudden it struck him that he had a
couple of sisters; and immediately he went over to the farm, where he
found the girls down by the pond sailing the boys’ boats and promising
each other never again to play with the boys or even so much as look
at them.

“You may come up to the colony, girls, and be waitresses at my tavern.”

Anna and Selma let the boats sail whither they would. Not a word did
they say about being forgotten and left to shift for themselves all
this long time. They went right along with their brother to the boys’
colony, blissfully happy.




VI

THE OLD SOLDIER


IT WAS late afternoon of a beautiful day in autumn. Back-Kaisa, the
onetime nursemaid at Mårbacka, who now worked at the loom, was tramping
through the woods on her way to the hill-croft where she was born and
grew up--on an errand for Lieutenant Lagerlöf. She and little Selma
were still great friends, and she had taken the child along. They were
in no hurry, these two; they stopped to pick and eat whortleberries
growing by the roadside, they admired the gorgeous flybane and gathered
their aprons full of lovely mosses to take home with them so as to have
something pretty to lay between the inner and storm-windows of the
nursery. Back-Kaisa was happy to be once more in the woods, where she
knew every shrub and every stone. When they came to the wattled fence
which surrounded the clearing where the croft-hut stood and were about
to step over the stile, Back-Kaisa said:

“Mind, Selma, you mustn’t say a word about war in Father’s hearing!”

The little girl was astonished at that. She knew that Back-Kaisa’s
father was an old soldier who had fought with Napoleon at Leipsic.
That one could not speak with him about war seemed unbelievable.

“Why can’t I talk to him about war?” she queried.

“That one must never do with them that’s been out in a real war,”
Back-Kaisa told her.

Now the little girl was more astonished than ever. She thought of
_Fritiof;_ of _Hjalmar;_ of _Hector_, and all the gods and heroes of
antiquity she had read about in her saga-books--and her head was in a
whirl.

In the cabin on the edge of the hearth, with his back to the fire, sat
Back-Kaisa’s father, a tall, gaunt-looking man with a coarse-featured
and furrowed face. That he was of the olden time could be seen by his
mode of dress, for he wore knee-breeches and shoes instead of boots and
had on a shockingly grimy sheepskin coat. But on the whole his
appearance was not more bizarre than that of other old peasants.

The little girl stared and stared at the soldier who would not allow
any one to speak of war in his hearing. To her there was nothing so
delightful as to hear tales of battles or read stories of wars. She
thought it a great pity that she could not ask him to tell her about
the things he had been through.

All the while she sat there she dared not speak or reply when spoken
to. She felt that if she opened her mouth she would forget, and say
something about war, and then the old man might kill her.

After a time she began to think he looked horrible. It was so
incomprehensible, this, that one could not talk to him about war.
There must be something dreadful back of it all which she did not
understand. Perhaps the old man was dangerous? She only wanted to
escape, and was ready to make for the door. With every moment that
passed her fear increased, and by the time Back-Kaisa was ready to
leave and they could at last say good-bye, she was fairly beside
herself with fright.

Now, if he had been like other old soldiers, and had said that war was
the greatest thing in the world; if he had boasted of killing hundreds
of men and burning down whole cities and villages, then the little girl
would not have been a bit afraid of him.




VII

THE LAND OF HEART’S DESIRE


IT WAS Lars of London, and Sven of Paris, and Magnus of Vienna, and
Johan of Prague, and Per of Berlin, and Olle of Maggebysäter, the
stableman and the farmboy!

Now Lars of London, Sven of Paris, Magnus of Vienna, Johan of Prague,
and Per of Berlin, they were not foreigners, but farm-labourers at
Mårbacka. Lieutenant Lagerlöf, in a facetious moment, had named his
workmen’s cottages after the principal cities of Europe.

Lars of London and Magnus of Vienna had been plowing all day in the
field below the barn; Sven of Paris had fed the cows and, between
times, helped on the potato land. Johan of Prague had been digging
potatoes, while Per of Berlin, who had been at home all day nursing a
lame back, had come over to the manor for a little diversion. The
stableman had been grooming the horses, and in spare moments chopping
firewood, and the farmboy had worked in the potato field. Olle of
Maggebysäter was not employed at the farm; he had just come down to
Mårbacka to buy a bushel of rye.

It was a drizzly day in autumn, and the men had gone into the servants’
hall for the usual afternoon rest--from half after four to five. Their
shoes were covered with mud, their clothing was damp, and they
themselves were sour and disgruntled. They had kindled a fire on the
hearth, and dropped down round it. Lars of London, who had the largest
croft and was the best workman, sat on the chopping-block directly in
front of the fire. Magnus of Vienna, who was almost as good a worker as
Lars, was sitting next to him, on one of the cobbler’s stools. Sven of
Paris, who thought himself quite as good as any of them, though he did
tend cattle, had planted himself on the edge of the hearth, not caring
whether he shut off the blaze from the others. Johan of Prague had
taken the other stool and the old man of Berlin had seated himself on a
saw-buck just back of the rest. The stableman sat on the edge of the
cubby-bed swinging his legs, the farmboy perched on the carpenter’s
bench, while Olle of Maggebysäter sat down by the door on a barrel of
red ochre, resting his feet on his sack of rye.

Lars of London, Magnus of Vienna, Johan of Prague, and Sven of Paris
now opened their food-bundles. They each took out a hunk of rye bread
with a dab of butter on top. Drawing their sheath-knives from the belts
under their leather aprons and wiping them on their trousers, they
proceeded to spread their bread and cut it up, bit by bit, eating it in
all comfort. The farmboy was sent over to the kitchen to fetch the
fare for himself and the stableman, and came back with two halves of a
rye-cake, two pats of butter, and two dishes of cottage cheese. Per of
Berlin, not having worked that day, had brought no lunch, and Olle of
Maggebysäter had none, either; they just sat and glowered at the
others.

When they had finished eating, Lars of London, Magnus of Vienna, Sven
of Paris, Johan of Prague, the stableman, and the farmboy
simultaneously drew from their trousers’ pockets a plug of tobacco. Per
of Berlin was not left out on this, for he, too, had his plug; but Olle
of Maggebysäter had not even a bit of tobacco in his pocket.

The sheath-knives were again drawn. Now each man cut off a piece of his
plug, laid it on his leather apron, chopped it fine, then filled his
cutty-pipe.

Lars of London picked up a thin stick of wood and lighted it at the
fire. After he had lit his own pipe he gave the light to Magnus of
Vienna, who passed it on to Sven of Paris; Sven of Paris handed it to
Johan of Prague, who reached back and offered it to Per of Berlin: Per
of Berlin leaned over so as to pass it to the stableman, who, after
lighting his pipe, held the burning stick in his hand till the farmboy
came across the room and took it. Olle of Maggebysäter, to be sure, had
no need of a light--having neither pipe nor tobacco. The other men now
being warm and well-fed, the world began to look better to them.

But Olle of Maggebysäter was three-score-and-ten, and so crippled with
rheumatism that his fingers were stiff and crooked like claws; his head
was drawn to one side, one leg was shorter than the other, his sight
was poor, his wits were nothing to brag about, and he was toothless and
ugly. Washed and combed he had certainly not been in half a year. The
fringe of whiskers under his chin was full of sticks and straws. He
owned a little croft up in the woods; but being nothing of a worker, he
had not been able to keep poverty out of his house. Always grumpy and
discontented, he had no friends. And now as the clouds of tobacco smoke
rose from the other men’s pipes, he muttered, as if to himself:

“I’ve had nothin’ but trouble and misery all my life; but now I’ve
heard about a land they call America, and there I want to go.”

The other men sat tranquilly musing over their pipes and made no
response.

Olle of Maggebysäter continued:

“You see, ’tis like this in America--you’ve only to hit a rock with
your stick and the rum’ll come spurtin’ out. That land I want to see
afore I die.”

The others gazed straight before them and smiled, but said nothing.

Olle of Maggebysäter talked on:

“No one can make me stick at home in this dull, miserable place, when I
know there’s a land where the hills are full o’ rum.”

The others remained persistently silent, but not a word of what Olle of
Maggebysäter said was lost on them.

“The leaves of the trees in that land, they’re nothin’ but gold,” said
the poor old man. “There you don’t have to do day’s work at a manor,
you’ve only to go to the woods and pull off an armful of leaves, and
then you can buy yourself whatever you want. Blow me, if I don’t move
over there, old as I be!”

They were now in a mellow mood, all the men in the servants’ hall. They
saw, as it were before their eyes, that land where you tap rum from the
rocks and pick gold off the trees.

The farm-bell rang. Rest-time was up. They must again go out into the
wet and cold.

Lars of London returned to his plow, Magnus of Vienna to his; Sven of
Paris, Johan of Prague, and the farmboy went back to digging potatoes,
Per of Berlin betook himself home to his cottage, the stableman had to
go and chop the evening’s firewood, and Olle of Maggebysäter,
shouldering his sack of rye, limped off to the woods.

None of them looked as glum as they did half an hour ago. There was a
little glint of light in their eyes. They all felt it was good to know
of a land where rum flowed from the hills and the forests were of
gold--even though it lay so far away they could never reach it.




VIII

THE “SLOM” SEASON


EAST of Mårbacka, beyond a wooded ridge, lies Gårdsjön, a little lake
in which there is a fish we call _slom._ The fish is about two inches
long, and so thin as to be almost transparent; but small as it is, it
is edible.

In Lieutenant Lagerlöf’s time, when everything was so much better than
it is now, folks used to take this fish out of the lake in countless
numbers. Its spawning time was in early spring, when the ice began to
break and there was open water along the shores. One could stand at the
water’s edge and scoop the fish up with dippers and buckets. Certainly
no one went to the bother of putting out nets for slom!

Slom was fished and peddled only at the spawning time; therefore, it
was a sure sign of spring when a Gårdsjö fisherman came to the kitchen
at Mårbacka with the first catch. The man, knowing he had brought a
desired commodity, boldly lifted the latch (in those days there was no
lock on the kitchen door) and walked in with an air of confident
assurance. He did not stop just inside the door as on other occasions;
without stating his errand, or even saying good-morning, he strode
across the floor to the big table and deposited a small basket done up
in a blue-checked cotton cloth. Then, stepping back to the door, he
stood with head proudly erect, and waited for what was to follow.

If the housekeeper and the maids were the only ones in the kitchen, he
could stand a long while unnoticed; for they would not permit
themselves to show any signs of curiosity. But if Lieutenant Lagerlöf’s
little daughters chanced to be there, they were over by the basket at a
bound, eagerly untying the cover to see what was under it.

And they found a little porcelain plate, edged round with a blue
landscape, which they recognized as having seen every year at this
season as far back as they remembered. On the plate was a small mound
of slom--some forty or fifty fishes.

Now slom when properly prepared is a tasty fish, but for all that it is
considered rather common food. At the other manors in the district it
was looked upon as poor man’s fare, but not so at Mårbacka. Lieutenant
Lagerlöf was such a lover of fish he would hardly eat anything else the
year round. After the eelpout had finished spawning, in February, he
had to be satisfied with such things as stockfish, dried pike, salt
salmon, salt whitefish, to say nothing of the everlasting herring! So
every day now he wondered if the slom would be along soon.

The little girls had also learned to regard this fish as a rare treat,
and were delighted when they saw what was in the basket. They called to
the housekeeper and the maids to come and see. It was slom! Lasse had
brought slom! Wasn’t it great? Wasn’t it wonderful? And there was
general rejoicing in the kitchen. The housekeeper immediately went into
the pantry and made a sandwich for the fisherman. When handing it to
him, she condescended to ask him whether it looked as if there would be
a good “take” that year. The fisherman, cocky and self-satisfied (for
this was his big day), actually had the temerity to chaff the dignified
old housekeeper. He said there would be more slom than all the riches
of Lieutenant Lagerlöf could buy.

Mamselle Lovisa, wondering what all this talk meant, came out to the
kitchen. Instantly she caught sight of the fisherman and the plate of
slom she threw up her hands and exclaimed in despair:

“Good Lord! Is that awful stuff coming in now again!”

It was a great disappointment to the little girls that Aunt Lovisa did
not share their delight. Still, she must have had some appreciation of
the auspicious event, for she said something in a low tone to the
housekeeper, who smiled and nodded approval. Whereupon the children and
the maids were told not to let Lieutenant Lagerlöf know the slom had
come; it was to be a surprise for his supper.

When the three little girls heard that, they were gladder than ever.
Their father was their best friend and playfellow; there was nothing
too good for him! They felt very important now, and not for anything
would they leave the kitchen. They begged to be allowed to clean the
fish, and knew from past years how it should be done: With one stroke
you cut off the head, with another you drew out the “innards.” The tiny
fish had no scales or sharp bones. If you cut off the tail it was a
sign you didn’t know how slom should be treated. Even after the fishes
were cleaned the children would not leave them out of their sight. They
watched the housekeeper wash them, dip them in flour, and put them in
the frying pan. It wouldn’t do to throw slom in the pan just any way.
The little fishes had to be laid down very carefully, one by one, close
together, none overlapping, and fried hard, so that they all stuck
together. Then, with a flip of the pancake-spade, they were turned
over. When well browned on both sides, they were covered with a hard
round oat-cake, and then turned out of the pan so that the slom lay on
top of the bread. The housekeeper told the children that was the way
their grandmother had fixed it. In the old mistress’s time they used to
set before each person at table a round of slom on an oat-cake, for in
those days they were not so well off for plates as now.

All the while the slom was frying the children were on pins and needles
lest their father should come into the kitchen. Every other minute they
ran out in the hall and opened the door to the living room a wee bit to
see whether he sat quietly reading his newspaper. When he got up to go
for his usual evening walk, their hearts were in their mouths. Oh,
dear! What if he should take a notion to go out by the kitchen way----?

Later, at supper, the three little girls could hardly contain
themselves. If they but glanced at their father they began to titter.
It was hardest for the littlest girl, who had to say grace. In the
middle of the prayer she gave a little chirrup like a sparrow when it
sees a grain of corn. The Lieutenant was about to ask what had come
over her when his eyes fell on the slom right by his plate. His face
lit up.

“Thank the Lord we’ve got something to eat in the house once more!” he
said, and actually meant it. For to him only fish was food.

The children after their long silence broke into peals of laughter.

“Oho!” charged the Lieutenant, shaking a finger at them. “So this is
why you’ve been running in and out the whole evening and wouldn’t let
me read my paper in peace!”

It was an unusually jolly supper. The Lieutenant was always good
humoured and talkative, but when he was especially pleased about
anything he became quite irresistible. Then he fairly bubbled with
amusing anecdotes and kept the whole table convulsed with laughter.

As for the slom, there was no more than the Lieutenant himself could
have eaten; but he insisted that all must have a share of this
“delicacy.” And of course everyone marvelled that such a tiny fish
could be so delicious.

“Now, doesn’t it taste good, Lovisa?” he asked his sister, who was as
fond of meat as he was of fish.

Even she had to concede that just for once like this it was not
bad--but too much of it----

When the Lieutenant folded his serviette before rising from table, he
said very solemnly:

“Now, children, mind what I’m telling you: The King in his royal palace
couldn’t have had a better supper than we’ve had. So we must give God
proper thanks for the food and not slur the grace.”

Thus ended the first day of the slom season.

The next morning the Gårdsjö fisherman brought a whole pound of slom.
He was well met, of course, and he asked twelve _skillings_ the pound
for his fish, which was considered a high price. The Lieutenant himself
came out to the kitchen with the money in order to thank the old man
for coming to Mårbacka with the slom, and request him to continue as he
had begun.

“Now for pity’s sake don’t take it to the parson’s or the founderer’s!”
he said.

This time, also, the little girls volunteered to clean the fish. And
now they were repaid for their trouble. There was slom enough for the
whole family at supper, and some left over for the Lieutenant’s
breakfast. But the serving-folk did not have any that day, either. It
was too choice a dish for them.

The third day the fisherman delivered enough slom to fill a large
earthen bowl. Slom was now served at the family table for both
breakfast and supper, and in the kitchen it was set before the
overseer, but not before the stableman or the farmboy.

The next few days folk from every little hamlet along the lake came
bringing slom to Mårbacka. The Lieutenant bought from all. Soon every
earthen vessel in the cupboard was filled to overflowing, and the fish
had to be emptied into a huge copper kettle; when even that would not
hold it all, it was dumped into a big vat.

But to clean such a lot of small fish was no light task! The housemaids
had to leave off spinning and weaving to sit in the kitchen cleaning
slom. The three little girls were no longer to be seen in the
schoolroom. It was not for fun they cleaned slom now, but to help the
grown-ups. Fru Lagerlöf and Mamselle Lovisa put aside their other work
to give a hand. But it was a bit of a change for them all--a little
departure from the usual routine.

The housekeeper did not help clean fish, she stood at the stove the
whole day frying it. Before long she began to complain of the
quantities of butter the fish was taking. The butter-tub had been full
only a few days before, and she could already see the bottom. That was
the first break in the general satisfaction.

The family had slom for breakfast and slom for supper; but thus far
at dinner there was the usual Värmland midday fare--corned beef or
pork, or herring-balls, or fried ham, or sausage, or whatever else
there was on hand. But such fare was not to the taste of Lieutenant
Lagerlöf. One day when he was served meat that had lain in brine since
autumn, he lost all patience.

“I don’t see why we should sit here and eat salt food when the pantry
is full of nice fresh fish,” he flung out. “But that’s always the way
of these fine housekeepers; they feed the homefolk on salt stuff and
let the fresh things stand on the shelves and spoil--waiting for
company.”

That was a sharp rap at his sister. But Mamselle Lovisa took it calmly;
she was too fond of her brother to be offended by anything he might
say. She meekly answered that she had never heard of any one’s setting
slom before guests.

“I know, Lovisa, that you are too refined to eat slom. You have been
out in the great world, and know how things ought to be. But I don’t
see why we back here at Mårbacka need bother ourselves about what they
do in Karlstad or Åmål.”

A light broke in on Mamselle Lovisa. “But surely you don’t want slom
for dinner, too!” she exclaimed, as if such a thing were unprecedented.

“Certainly I’ll eat slom whenever I can get it. Why do you suppose I
buy it every day, if I’m not to have any myself?”

After that, they had slom morning, noon, and night; which was not a
happy thought on the part of the Lieutenant. There is no denying that
slom is a nice-tasting fish, but it has an unpleasant odour. Not in the
sense of being tainted; but it is evil-smelling from the moment it
comes out of the water. However, all that disappears in the frying. But
those who have to handle the raw fish cannot escape, for it is an odour
that clings. Do what you will, it stays by you. Everything you touch
smells of slom.

Soon all but the Lieutenant began to sicken of slom. They took smaller
portions at each meal, and sighed as they sat down at table and saw the
everlasting slom set before them again.

Lieutenant Lagerlöf, however, went on buying. The fisherman who had
brought the first mess, true to his word, came faithfully every day,
and sometimes twice a day. But his manner was noticeably changed. He
now pulled the latch-string very gently, and came in with a meek and
deprecating smile. He did not set the fish on the kitchen table but
left it outside the door. Though he removed his cap and said Good-day,
he had to stand and wait a good half-hour before anyone seemed aware of
his presence.

Pleasant as it had been for both the maids and the children to escape
for a while from the old routine, they were by now so sick and tired of
cleaning fish they longed to get back to their regular tasks. None of
them would so much as look at the fisherman.

“I say, Lars, you’re not bringing slom again to-day, are you?” the
housekeeper once asked him, as if he were offering stolen goods.

The man just blinked his eyes; he was too abashed to utter a word.

“We’ve got more fish now than we can eat,” she told him. “I don’t
believe the Lieutenant wants to buy any more of that horrid stuff.”
However, she knew the Lieutenant was not to be trifled with in the
matter of slom, so of course she had to go in and tell him the
fisherman had come.

One day the Lieutenant was out when the old man appeared, so the
housekeeper peremptorily ordered him away. All in the kitchen were
glad, thinking that for once they would not have to clean any slom. But
as luck would have it, the old man met the Lieutenant in the lane; and
the latter bought his whole bagful of fish and sent him back to the
house with it.

It went on like that for a couple of weeks. Everyone was weary and
disgusted--except the Lieutenant. He chanted the praises of slom at
every meal; it was wholesome and nutritious food. One need only look at
the fishermen down in Bohuslän who lived upon fish; they were the
strongest and healthiest men in the whole country.

One evening Mamselle Lovisa tried to tempt him with larded pancakes, a
favourite dish of his. And no wonder! for such larded pancakes as the
old housekeeper made you never tasted in all your life!

“The overseer and the men, I suppose, must have their fill of slom, so
you want me to be satisfied with pancakes.” The Lieutenant waved away
the plate of nice hot cakes.

“Oh, no, that’s not the reason,” said Mamselle Lovisa. “The overseer
and the men are so sick of slom we dare not set it before them.”

Then the Lieutenant had to laugh; but, as he would not touch the
pancakes, they had to fetch him his slom.

Toward the end of the second week the whole household was in open
rebellion. The housekeeper raged about the inroads on the butter, and
the servants declared they could not go on working at a place where
they fed you on nothing but slom. It had reached a pass where the
Lieutenant dared not show his face in the kitchen; for there the
murmurs were loudest. Nor were things as they should be in the dining
room. Joy had fled the board. The governess left her plate untouched
and the little daughters of the house, who otherwise stuck by their
father through thick and thin, even they began to pipe a few feeble
protests.

Then at last Fru Lagerlöf came to the rescue. She conferred with
Mamselle Lovisa and the housekeeper, and they all thought it time now
to resort to the old tried and sure remedy.

At dinner there was boiled slom. Now, the very look of boiled slom is
enough! There is a pallor about it peculiarly corpselike, and, besides,
it is quite tasteless. Just the sight of it takes away one’s appetite.

When the Lieutenant saw the boiled slom he looked as glum as the
others.

“We are all out of butter,” Mamselle Lovisa gave as excuse; “and since
you will have slom at every meal we had no choice but to serve it
boiled. For my part,” she added, “I think it tastes no worse that way
than any other.”

The Lieutenant made no answer; so they all knew that Mamselle Lovisa
had triumphed. He might easily have stepped into the pantry and seen
for himself whether the butter was all gone, or ordered a fresh supply;
but he did neither.

After that dinner he bought no more slom. What was the use, he said,
when the womenfolk were too lazy to prepare the fish in the proper way?
No one contradicted him, though all knew he was as glad as they were to
see the last of the slom.




IX

THE SEVENTEENTH OF AUGUST


I

IT IS not easy to say how the seventeenth of August, which was
Lieutenant Lagerlöf’s birthday, came to be the great day that it was.
But one can imagine that with so many gifted persons all living in a
little place like East Ämtervik, it was really necessary that they
should have a chance, at least once a year, to show what they could do.

When, for example, there were three such fine orators as Engineer
Noreen of Herrestad, Senator Nils Andersson of Bävik, and Merchant
Teodor Nilsson of Visteberg, the first of whom went in for the
pathetic, the second for the profound, and the third for the poetic, it
would have been a great pity had they never been heard elsewhere than
at small parties and town meetings.

And with a verse writer, too, like Sexton Melanoz at one’s command!
Days on end he had to sit in the schoolroom and hear the youngsters
spell, stammer, and stumble through the intricate mazes of the Swedish
language. Surely he needed to let this maltreated tongue ring out in
high-sounding eulogistic measures once a year at least!

Then, moreover, there was a male quartette in the parish composed of
such good singers as Gustaf and Jan Asker, of the old musical Askers,
and the brothers Alfred and Tage Schullström, who kept a store down by
the church. People were thankful to them whenever they sang; but for
the singers themselves it must have been both stimulating and inspiring
to sing at a grand affair where they had critical and discriminating
hearers.

And the old man Asker, who played dance music at peasant weddings where
nobody cared what came forth from the clarinet just so it had dash and
rhythm--he must indeed have been glad to come to Mårbacka on a
seventeenth of August! The young folk there appreciated his art, and
told him there was no music in the world so easy to dance to as his.

Then, too, there was a brass sextette made up of Tage Schullström,
Sergeant Johan Dalhgren, the Gårdsjö Inspector, a shop-clerk and two
infant-school teachers. They had all invested in instruments and
scores, and had rehearsed marches and waltzes, overtures and
folk-songs. It would have been too bad not to have had one gala day,
when their efforts were crowned by the award of triumph.

When, besides, among the relatives who spent their summers at Mårbacka
there were two clever entertainers like Oriel Afzelius, husband of Fru
Lagerlöf’s sister, and her own brother, Kristofer Wallroth, it was well
that away off here in the farming country there was a fête on a grand
enough scale to tempt them to perform.

Moreover, among the guests was a born prima donna, the pretty and merry
Stockholmer, Fru Hedda Hedberg, who could act as well as sing, and was
in every way adapted for the stage. But she had married a poor Värmland
lieutenant. Therefore, one may well say it was almost imperative that
there should be a seventeenth of August celebration where all this
wealth of talent might come into its own.


II

AFTER Lieutenant Lagerlöf became master of Mårbacka, for the first few
years the seventeenth of August was observed in the customary birthday
manner; there were flowers on the coffee table and a garland of leaves
round the Lieutenant’s cup. The neighbours dropped in to wish him many
happy returns of the day, and were served with coffee, fruit juice,
punch, and toddy. Then came supper at nine o’clock with the usual light
chatter. After the meal, tables and chairs were removed from the living
room that all might have a bit of a dance.

But somehow it must have been spread abroad that these little birthday
parties were rather pleasant affairs. Since there was never any thought
of sending out invitations, all who cared to come were welcome; so from
year to year more and more folk gathered at Mårbacka.

And there were increases in the families, of course. As soon as the
little ones began to toddle, they had to come along to Mårbacka to
celebrate Lieutenant Lagerlöf’s birthday. And sometimes the neighbours,
who always attended these parties, had guests at home, and, naturally,
they brought them.

In those days, when the young gentlemen would go many a mile for the
sake of a dance, they, too, began to pay their respects to Lieutenant
Lagerlöf on the seventeenth of August. Besides, there were the
relatives from other parts of the country who visited Mårbacka every
summer, and they planned their trips so as to be present on the
Lieutenant’s birthday.

As it was always fine weather on the seventeenth of August, in the
Lieutenant’s lifetime, the guests would while away the time strolling
about the grounds, viewing his gardens and buildings. If many young
people were present, the dancing would begin before supper. Everyone,
no doubt, had a pleasant enough time, though no more so than at other
parties.

Then happily Lieutenant Adolf Hedberg and his pretty young wife came to
live at East Ämtervik. At Lieutenant Lagerlöf’s next birthday party an
old peasant woman with a basket of eggs to sell stalked into the
kitchen in the midst of the festivities.

She was immediately ordered out, of course; no one had time to stop and
buy eggs in the bustle and excitement, with so many guests to be
served. Not in the least discouraged, the old woman went round to the
veranda, where the Lieutenant sat with a circle of gentlemen. Indeed
she was not embarrassed by the presence of the company; her tongue
wagged so rapidly and she was so facetiously persistent, he had to buy
her eggs to get rid of her. Even after she had stuffed the money into
the pocket of her kirtle, she would not go. Then she wanted to know who
the other gentlemen were, and commented rather freely on their personal
appearance. Finally, young Lieutenant Hedberg, who thought the joke had
gone far enough, said:

“You’d better stop now, Hedda.”

Whereupon the “old peasant woman” rushed up, and dealt him a sound box
on the ear.

“Why, Adolph!” she cried, “how can you be so mean as to give me away
like that!”

And indeed it was a shame, for her disguise was so perfect and her
Värmland dialect so deliciously natural that none would have taken her
for the charming lady from Stockholm.

That bit of drollery set the ball of talents rolling. Along in the
evening Kristofer Wallroth sang a number of Eric Bögh’s ditties. He had
no voice to speak of, but his rendition of the serio-comic was
side-splitting. At the end, Auditor Afzelius, with a silk kerchief
bound round his head and a mantilla thrown over his shoulder, sang
“Emilie’s Heart-throbs.” That was, of course, the star feature of the
evening; the Auditor was inimitable in the rôle of the lovelorn maiden.

It must have been rather galling to the local pride of Sexton Melanoz
that only these city folk provided entertainment for the Lieutenant and
his guests. But the next year it was the sexton who made the “big hit.”
The Lieutenant had once presented to the Ostenby school a lot of small
wooden muskets made at Mårbacka so that the children might learn to
drill. He had even sent an old sergeant to the school to teach the
youngsters the first military movements.

The sexton had an inspiration; he and his school children would march
to Mårbacka on the Lieutenant’s birthday! Shouldering their arms, and
led by banner and drum, they came marching along the driveway. It
looked as if a whole army were approaching. There were so many the line
extended from the manservants’ cottage all the way up to the
dwelling-house veranda, where the sexton, who was in command, called
Halt!

First, he said a few words to the effect that the children had come to
thank Lieutenant Lagerlöf for considering that their bodies needed to
be developed as well as their minds; then he let them demonstrate how
well they could march--do right-about, left-about, close ranks,
shoulder arms ...

It was a grand surprise the sexton had prepared for them all. The
Lieutenant was delighted and his guests were pleased. What the old
housekeeper, Mamselle Lovisa, and Fru Lagerlöf thought, when in the
middle of a big party they had to serve coffee and cakes to some sixty
youngsters, may be left to the imagination. After that, every time the
seventeenth of August came round, they remembered with dismay the long
procession of children, and hoped the sexton’s army would not be so
strong this year.

Engineer Noreen and his wife, like the sexton, had felt it was not fair
to let folk from outside the parish furnish all the amusement for the
seventeenth of August. So along in the evening, when there was a moon,
the Engineer donned a black velvet cape and plumed baretta, and Fru
Emelie an old-time dress with high puffed sleeves. Then, on the
gravel-walk below the veranda, they gave two or three scenes from
Börjesson’s “Eric XIV.” This acting in the mellow moonlight was touched
with enchantment. Eric Noreen had so wholly lived himself into the rôle
of the unhappy King, it seemed as if every word he spoke came straight
from his heart. And Fru Noreen looked sweet and shy and just a bit
frightened, as a “Karin Månsdotter” should look.

At the next year’s celebration there were more people than ever.
Carriages, pony-carts, and chaises came rolling up the avenue. In a
short space of time some seventy or eighty persons had arrived. It was
evident the report had travelled far and wide that they had many
delightful diversions at Mårbacka not to be found elsewhere.

This time the Lieutenant felt quite embarrassed, as there was nothing
special to offer the guests. It was just as at any other party; the
young folk began to dance in the early afternoon, the _paterfamilias_
chatted over their toddy glasses, and the _maters_ sat in the drawing
room nibbling fruit and confectionery. Apparently, no one was bored,
for Auditor Afzelius and Dean Hammargren among the men and Hedda
Hedberg and Nana Hammargren among the women knew how to enliven a
company. The Lieutenant noted no mysterious glances nor any signs of
preparation. Not even the usual birthday speech was forthcoming.

Then as dusk was falling, folk from all the countryside came flocking
to Mårbacka. The avenue leading to the house was soon black with
people. The Lieutenant thought it a pity they had taken the trouble to
come when there was nothing to be seen.

After supper there was a little flutter of excitement and expectancy
among the guests. Presently two gentlemen placed before the Lieutenant
a flower-decked armchair, and bade him be seated. Instantly strong arms
lifted him on high. Jan Asker struck up a march; the gentlemen offered
their arms to the ladies, and all marched out into the night. But not
for long did they walk in darkness. When they turned the corner of
the house, the whole garden was a-light with row upon row of magic
lanterns. The Lieutenant was borne along illuminated walks down to the
little park. It was the first time anything of the sort had been
attempted at Mårbacka. He was struck with wonder and amazement at the
beauty of the scene. Could this be the ground that he and the old
gardener had staked and measured only a few years back?

Exclamations of delight came from all sides. How dark and mysterious
the copses; how deep and endless the paths appeared under their canopy
of leaves; how the flowers shimmered and shone in the light of the
multi-coloured lanterns; how the masses of foliage hung down from the
trees like gorgeous draperies!

The procession halted in one of the glades of the park. The
Lieutenant’s chair was set down; and, as his dazzled eyes blinked into
a grotto of leaves and flowers, Flora, on a pedestal, encircled by
little nymphs, sang in a glorious voice a song of praise to the creator
of the garden.

“Oh, Hedda!” the Lieutenant cried to the beautiful goddess of flowers,
“I might have known that you would not forget me!”


III

IT IS about four in the afternoon of a seventeenth of August. The two
smaller girls, Selma and Gerda, are dressing for the party. The
housemaid pokes her head into the attic storeroom--the room the little
girls are occupying temporarily, since their own has been placed at the
convenience of visiting relatives.

“Selma and Gerda, you’ll have to go down and receive,” shouts the maid.
“No one else is ready, and the first carriages are coming up the
drive.”

Now the little girls have to hurry; but at the same time they are
thrilled with joy. Just think! It’s beginning--the seventeenth of
August is beginning!

They button up their frocks, pin on their kerchief rosettes, and run
down. Not a grown person in sight! Not even their elder sister can help
them receive, since she is attending a dress rehearsal of the evening’s
play.

The first arrivals, Herr Nilsson, his wife and four children, are
already seated on the veranda. They always come too early to parties,
but never so much so as on the seventeenth of August. The little girls
do not wonder at that; for everyone must long to come to Mårbacka on
such a day.

The time seems a bit long, perhaps, to the guests and their little
hostesses before the next vehicle rolls up and the homefolk put in an
appearance. But to-day is the Seventeenth, and one does not catch at
trifles.

The next arrivals are Pastor Alfred Unger and family from West
Ämtervik. They come in a two-horse carriage and have driven about
thirteen English miles. The wagon is full of women and children; the
parson himself, who is a real horseman, is handling the reins.
Lieutenant Lagerlöf, ready at last, comes out on the veranda as the
pastor drives in on the grounds.

“Say, Alfred!” he shouts, “what the deuce have you done to your horses?
They’re as like as two blackberries.”

“Chut, chut! You mustn’t betray any secrets on your birthday,” Pastor
Unger shouts back.

As a matter of fact, the parson had two fine carriage horses which
would have been exactly alike but for a white spot on the forehead of
one of them. He had hit upon the idea of inserting between the
blinder-straps of each a piece of white leather, to make it appear
that the horses were perfectly matched. No one would have detected the
artifice if the pastor had not been so proud of his device that he had
talked of it to right and left, and of course the Lieutenant had heard
all about it.

But besides this conveyance from West Ämtervik comes a hayrick packed
full of young people, relatives from Karlstad. Then wagon after wagon
draws up. Here come the Gårdsjö folk--most delightful of guests! They
have a long line of vehicles. They are a large family, and besides
themselves they have brought Oriel and Georgina Afzelius, and Kristofer
Wallroth and his young sister, Julia, who are staying with them.

In one of the Gårdsjö wagons there are some odd looking large white
bundles, to be taken upstairs to the theatre. Selma and Gerda are very
curious to know what those are for. The little Wallroth girls are sworn
to secrecy; all they dare divulge is that Uncle Oriel has thought of
something perfectly gorgeous.

Then who should come up but old Engineer Ivan Warberg from Angersby,
with a cartful of pretty girls! A jubilant whoop from the veranda!
What, a confirmed old bachelor like Ivan Warberg? Who would have
thought it! They all know, to be sure, that the girls are his nieces,
and his guests for the summer; but they can’t resist the fun of teasing
Ivan a bit.

The little Lagerlöf girls think it strange Fru Hedda does not appear.
True, she no longer lives at East Ämtervik; but they hope she will come
and do something jolly. Somehow, it would not be a real seventeenth of
August unless she were there.

And now come the nearest neighbours. Pastor Milén and his boys have
moved to another parish. To-day, it is the tall, handsome Pastor
Lindegren and his sweet little wife who stroll over from the parsonage.
From Där Ner in Mårbacka come Mother Kersten and Father Olof; but they
are not the only peasant-folk who want to felicitate the Lieutenant.
Old man Larsson of Ås, the richest man in the parish, has come with his
daughters; the Senator from Bävik with his wife, and the church warden
of Västmyr with his.

The little girls are in a perfect twitter of excitement as they stand
beside their father and see all who come. One whom they most anxiously
await is Jan Asker. They do hope he is not hurt about something and
will stay away. They try to count heads, but as people keep pouring in
from every direction they soon lose the count. Maybe there are already
a hundred guests! They hope it will be a gay party. It sounds so grand
to the children when somebody says there were a hundred persons
gathered at Mårbacka on the seventeenth of August.

But this receiving is merely an introduction to that which is to
follow. It is the same with the coffee-drinking on the lawn. The
children wish all such things were over.

Ah, at last it is going to begin! The brass sextette line up in
position below the steps. A march is struck. The gentlemen offer an
arm to the ladies and, led by the band, the couples march through the
garden down to the little park.

There they gather round a table on which stand glasses of punch and
claret-cup. Obviously, the moment has come for the birthday speech and
the toast to Lieutenant Lagerlöf. Engineer Noreen, Senator Nils
Andersson, and Herr Nilsson of Visteberg have all come prepared to
speak. Each wonderingly looks at the others, and hesitates, not wanting
to push forward and take the word from his rivals.

“Well, are we to have something?” the Lieutenant asks. These high-flown
set speeches are not to his taste, and he is anxious to have that part
of the programme over as quickly as possible. Just then from behind him
comes a clear voice, with musical Stockholm intonations, and out of the
thicket steps a beautiful Zingara. She asks if she may tell his
fortune. Taking his left hand between her two pretty hands, she reads
the lines of his palm.

Lieutenant Lagerlöf had been very ill during the winter, and to regain
his health had spent part of the summer at Strömstad. All his exploits
and divertissements on that sojourn the Zingara now reads in his hand,
and, moreover, she reveals them in lilting verse.

It is a bit pert and naughty, to be sure, but it provokes laughter and
the Lieutenant is charmed.

“Anyhow, you’re Number One, Hedda!” he says.

But when Fru Hedda has proposed a health to the host, and has led the
fourfold hurrahs, and the sextette has tooted a fanfare, she gives the
three speakers from East Ämtervik a sweeping glance, and says: “Pray,
pardon my intrusion. Now it is the turn of the natives.”

“The ‘natives’ are already beaten, Fru Hedberg,” replies Engineer
Noreen.

Far back in the garden sounds old Jan Asker’s clarinet, and the glitter
of helmets and shining armour is seen among the trees. Jan Asker and
Sexton Melanoz must have come upon three of the Immortal Ases, Odin,
Thor, and Freja, who were bound for Mårbacka but had somehow lost their
way. Jan and the Sexton have guided them safely hither, so that the
shining gods may speak for themselves.

No, they do not speak. The three gods break into song; they chant to
the old familiar melody “Come lovely May,” a pæan to all that has been
wrought here at Mårbacka in the time of Lieutenant Lagerlöf--every word
of which is true. Tears glisten in many an eye, and the Lieutenant
himself is deeply moved by his old friend’s lyric.

“Melanoz is superb to-day!” he says. “After all, Hedda, I believe the
natives will carry off the palm.”

With this, the fête has been impressively and happily opened. The
guests now scatter about the grounds. Some visit the berry bushes and
cherry trees, and others want to see whether the fine Mårbacka peaches
are ripening.

In a little while comes another fanfare. The gentlemen now escort the
ladies back to the house and up the perilous attic stairs. The loft has
been converted into a theatre, its small stage screened off with white
draperies. The theatre is the work of Fru Lagerlöf, and is the cutest
little place imaginable.

A moment’s suspense, and the curtain goes up on a musical allegory
written in the forenoon of that very day by Oriel Afzelius. It is
entitled, “The Monk and the Dancer.” The action takes place on the day
of Lieutenant Lagerlöf’s birth, August 17, 1819. Beside the cradle of
the new-born babe, instead of the usual fairies, stand two symbolical
figures, a monk and a dancer.

The _Dancer_ would have the boy grow up a merry, dashing cavalier. The
_Monk_, on the contrary, would make of him a serious ascetic. After a
spirited controversy, they finally come to an agreement. Each shall
direct one half of the little Mårbacka child’s span of life. So for a
time he is destined to lead the jolly life of a young officer; in his
later years he is to settle down quietly, and practise abstinence and
good deeds, with Mårbacka as cloister. Oriel Afzelius as the Monk and
Kristofer Wallroth in draperies and veils as the Dancer, sing solos
and duets from the popular operas. They gesticulate and declaim
with emotional fervour, and wind up their quarrel with a lively
_pas-de-deux._

As the curtain falls there is wild applause. People shout, stamp their
feet, and wave their handkerchiefs. Fru Lagerlöf sits in fear and
trembling lest the floor give way under the storm. The Lieutenant cries
out:

“Yi, yi, Melanoz! It’s none of the outlanders winning now!”

The young folk at Mårbacka have rehearsed a little play, but the
players feel rather disheartened as they are about to appear; they have
nothing to offer comparable to Uncle Oriel’s allegory.

Anna Lagerlöf is now fourteen, and this is her first appearance in a
regular part. The piece is called “A Cigar,” and she is cast for the
rôle of the young wife.

Indeed, the performance is far from a failure, thanks to the acting of
little Anna Lagerlöf! “How does that child come by her histrionic
talent?” people wonder. She acts with such ease, naturalness, and
charm, the spectators cannot get over their surprise. “That little girl
is going to be a heart-breaker,” some are heard to say. “Why, the lass
is really pretty!” comes from another quarter. “And how well she acts,
too!”

It seemed as if the plaudits and curtain calls would never end.

“Do you see, Lieutenant,” shouts Sexton Melanoz above the tumult, “that
the natives can hold their own?”

But at last they clamber down the break-neck attic stairs. Then they
dance again, and chatter, and drink toddies, and some of them take to
story-telling, for which up to then there has been no time.

After supper, at midnight, the Chinese lanterns are lit. This is done
every year now, and must never be omitted. For a change, they have the
illumination on the front lawn.

Ah! how lovely it looks--as Mamselle Lovisa’s flower beds stand out in
the vari-coloured light; as the weeping ash, like a huge lamp, sends
forth its rays through the lacy branches; as the dark copses gleam as
if with fire-flowers!

Now all have come out to see the illuminations. They find themselves in
a fairyland. The sweet harmonies of the quartette intensify the spell
of enchantment.

Then comes a wonderful thing! It is like the soft caress of a balmy
wind. No, one cannot say what it is. But they who have been together
these ten hours, chatting, dancing, playing, listening to music and
speeches, are now prepared for it. As they drink in the song and the
beauty of the night, they are filled with a blissful rapture. Ah, life
is so beautiful! How precious the moments! Every breath is a joy!

Now out of the throng steps Fru Hedda. In a moment she appears on the
veranda, and starts the Värmland Anthem. All join in the singing, for
in this way they are able to express what they feel: _Ack, Värmeland,
du sköna, du härliga land!_ They seem to hear voices back in the
thickets and copses, and surmise that the Mårbacka elves and fairies
are dancing a contra-dance under the maple trees to the lovely melody.

Hands press hands; eyes meet eyes through a mist of tears. And no one
is surprised, for it is such an unspeakable happiness just to be!

At the close of the song, as Fru Hedda withdraws, Herr Noreen steps
forward: he, too, would interpret the spirit of the hour.

“It is _this_ that is the seventeenth of August,” he says; “not the
singing nor the play-acting, not the dancing nor the feasting, but that
which we now feel--the sweet solemn joy which has stolen into our
hearts, the love which permeates this blessed night. It was for this we
longed when we came; it is for this we shall come again next year.

“Why is it, dear Brother Eric Gustaf, that we must come here to you in
order to feel reconciled to our fate, proud of our country, happy with
ourselves and with those about us? You are no big important man. You
have done no great outstanding thing. But you have within you the best
of good-will and an open heart. We know that, were it in your power,
you would take the whole world in your embrace. This is why you can
give us each year a few hours of bliss, a little glimpse of Paradise,
which we of East Ämtervik call the Seventeenth of August.”




POSTSCRIPT




POSTSCRIPT


IT WAS the Seventeenth of August, year 1919.

I had had a wreath bound, the prettiest that could be made up at
Mårbacka, and with this before me in the victoria, I drove to the
church. I was in holiday attire, the victoria shone with a new coat of
varnish, and the horses were in their best harness.

It was a perfect day. The earth lay bathed in sunshine, the air was
mild, and across the pale blue sky floated a few white wisps of cloud.
Not the slightest breeze blew from any direction. It was a Sunday, and
I saw little children in holiday dress playing in the yards, and grown
folk in their Sunday best setting off for church. No cows or sheep or
chickens were seen in the road, as on weekdays, when the victoria
passed through the village of Ås.

The crop that year was so abundant, it seemed as if the good old times
were back with us again. The haylofts along the way were so full,
shutters and doors could not be closed; the rye fields were decked with
close rows of shooks; the apple trees in the front yards hung heavy
with reddening fruit, and the fallow fields, newly sown, showed a
tender crop just turning green.

I sat thinking that here was something Lieutenant Lagerlöf--whose
centenary it was that day--would have liked to see. Here was
prosperity. It was not as in 1918 and 1917 and 1915 and 1914 and
1911--those dreadful years of drouth! How he would have rejoiced at
this! He would have nodded to himself, and averred that nowhere in all
Värmland could they raise such crops as in his parish.

During the whole long drive to the church, my father was in my
thoughts. On this very road he had driven many and many a time. I
pictured with what keen interest he would have noted all the changes.
Every house which had been repainted, every new window, every roof
where tiling had replaced the old shingles, he would have pointed out
and commented upon. The cottage Där Fram at Ås, which had remained
unaltered, would have delighted him; but he would have been sorry to
find Jan Larsson’s old house--the finest in the parish in his
time--torn down.

Certainly he had never been opposed to changes and improvements, though
there were some time-honoured things he had wished to leave
undisturbed. Were he here now, he would think us a shiftless lot to
have in this day and age the old crooked, sagging fences that were here
in his time. He would be shocked to find the road ditches still choked
with weeds, the bridges weak and full of holes, and the dung-yards
still lying at the edge of the road.

When I came to the crossing where the village road runs into the
great highway, how I wished I might have pointed out to him the fine
health resort among the hills, and told him that Ås Springs were now
visited every year by hundreds of people. It would have gladdened
him to know that his idea--that this would some day be a popular
watering-place--had not been so far afield. I could have wished he were
beside me in the carriage as I drove across the Ämtan Bridge! It would
have been a joy to show him that the river had at last been dredged,
and now ran in a straight course, no longer overflowing its banks.

As I drove by the Ostenby school, I seemed to see him standing on the
playground scattering handfuls of pennies--happy and content as always,
when he had a crowd of children about him. I had heard him say, time
and time again, that popular education was a calamity, and would bring
us to ruin. But all the same, on every examination day, he would drive
down to the school to sit for hours while his good friend Melanoz
quizzed the children in catechism and history, and let them show how
clever they were at arithmetic and composition. I doubt whether there
was any one more pleased than he when the youngsters gave correct
answers and got good marks and prizes. I had often wondered at this;
but now I understand that where children were concerned, all prejudice
was thrown to the winds.

I remembered how it had been in the old days when we drove into the
church grove. We were hailed with cheery salutations as folk sprang
aside to let our carriage pass, and father sat smiling and raising his
hand to the brim of his hat. But when I drove in on the same ground,
the place looked so empty and deserted.

I was alone in the carriage, and among all who had come to the church
only I remembered that this was my father’s birthday. I stepped out and
went over to the churchyard to place the wreath. My sad heart wept over
my loved ones who lay sleeping there. Father and Mother, Grandmother,
Aunt Lovisa, and the old housekeeper--I had seen them all laid away.

I longed for them, I wished they might come back and dwell in that
Mårbacka which their labours had built up.

But still, silent, inaccessible, they slept on. They seemed not to hear
me. Yet, perhaps they did. Perhaps these recollections, which have
hovered round me the last few years, were sent forth by them. I do not
know, but I love to think so.


THE END




Transcriber’s Note


This transcription is based on scans made available by the University
of Michigan and Google:

  https://books.google.com/books?id=pEUVAAAAMAAJ

To standardize a few inconsistencies in place names, the text of the
1922 Swedish edition was consulted. This text is available through the
Hathi Digital Library at:

  https://hdl.handle.net/2027/umn.31951p00687609k

The following changes were made to the printed text:

• Table of contents: II. The Money Chest--Added a hyphen between
“Money” and “Chest” for consistency.

• p. 20: “Hush up, Selma! You must’t talk when you’re facing such
danger!--Changed “must’t” to “mustn’t”.

• p. 56: The Sunne priest used also to officiate at Åmtervik--Changed
“Åmtervik” to “Ämtervik” to be consistent with the Swedish text.

• p. 90: Eligible young gentlemen from Sunne--from Ämbervik--now came
a-courting.--Changed “Ämbervik” to “Ämtervik” to be consistent with the
Swedish text.

• p. 112: THE MONEY CHEST--Added a hyphen between “MONEY” and “CHEST”
in the chapter title for consistency with the text.

• p. 114: You’d better go in and ask for house-room.--Added a closing
double quotation mark at the end of the sentence.

• p. 130: so that Lars would not dare come with any of his monkey
tricks.”--Deleted the closing double quotation mark. The speaker’s
dialogue continues in the next paragraph.

• p.145: they could hardly be used for a bridal crown.--Added a hyphen
between “bridal” and “crown” for consistency.

• p. 264: so many gifted persons all living in a little place like East
Åmtervik--Changed “Åmtervik” to “Ämtervik” to be consistent with the
Swedish text.

• p. 269: The Lieutenant had once presented to the Ottenby
school--Changed “Ottenby” to “Ostenby” to be consistent with how the
Swedish “Östanby” is rendered elsewhere.

• p. 285: Deleted the subheading “I” under the “POSTSCRIPT” heading.
There is no other subheading in the postscript.

Except where noted otherwise, inconsistencies of spelling and
hyphenation have been preserved.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MÅRBACKA ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
